[Amit Varma]: Can stories make us better human beings?
[Amit Varma]: I've always believed that they can.
[Amit Varma]: When we enter the lives of others, see the world through their eyes, we develop empathy
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps even compassion.
[Amit Varma]: The more we experience the world through stories, the more we can transcend our own limited
[Amit Varma]: experience and understand how human beings everywhere are bound by the same emotions
[Amit Varma]: and values.
[Amit Varma]: And what about storytelling?
[Amit Varma]: When you tell a story through the eyes of someone else, do you become that other person
[Amit Varma]: in the course of the telling?
[Amit Varma]: Does every story that you tell change you in subtle ways?
[Amit Varma]: And what about conversation?
[Amit Varma]: When you enter a conversation with someone, a genuine conversation in which you trust
[Amit Varma]: the person you're speaking to and in which you listen, really listen to them, opening
[Amit Varma]: yourself out to them, does that change you as well?
[Unknown]: Should we cherish every form that can take us outside of ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Nilesh Mishra, the storyteller and conversationalist I have admired for a
[Amit Varma]: long time.
[Amit Varma]: Nilesh started off in journalism in the 1990s, even wrote a few books and then became a radio
[Amit Varma]: legend as a storyteller.
[Amit Varma]: Many of his stories set in the now mythical town of the Yad Sheher.
[Amit Varma]: These stories about common people in common situations struck a chord across India and
[Amit Varma]: soon many people were contributing stories they had written to his show.
[Amit Varma]: And a remarkable community of listeners and storytellers emerged from there.
[Amit Varma]: He also launched India's biggest rural media platform, Gaon Connection, and pioneered what
[Amit Varma]: he calls a slow movement.
[Amit Varma]: I'll provide links to all of these in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: He also hosts a brilliant interview show on YouTube called The Slow Interview, which shares
[Amit Varma]: my personal ethic of letting a conversation breathe and spread out and digress.
[Amit Varma]: I was keen to have Nilesh on my show to discuss both storytelling and the art of conversation,
[Amit Varma]: and I was delighted when he agreed.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: How would you like to start your own podcast?
[Amit Varma]: Since you're listening to The Seen and The Unseen, I don't need to sell you on the power
[Amit Varma]: of podcasting.
[Amit Varma]: Audio is a unique medium, different from any other, and it allows for a level of depth
[Amit Varma]: and engagement that no other form does.
[Amit Varma]: You've no doubt experienced this in the long-form conversations that I've had here, but even
[Amit Varma]: for storytellers, this is the most exciting medium.
[Amit Varma]: And the best part of it all is anyone can start a podcast.
[Amit Varma]: You are limited only by your imagination and desire.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to help you by sharing my insights with you.
[Amit Varma]: I've just launched an online course called The Art of Podcasting, in which I will talk
[Amit Varma]: about what makes audio so unique, the different forms of storytelling that it enables, the
[Amit Varma]: art of the interview, and what will make your podcast stand out.
[Amit Varma]: I'll talk about these broader concepts, as well as the nitty-gritties of what equipment
[Amit Varma]: to use, how to record, how to distribute, how to market your podcast and build your
[Amit Varma]: brand.
[Amit Varma]: My course consists of three webinars over three Sundays and costs rupees 10,000 plus
[Amit Varma]: GST or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: For more details and to sign up, head on over to seenunseen.in slash learn.
[Amit Varma]: The Art of Podcasting at seenunseen.in slash learn.
[Amit Varma]: Nilesh, welcome to the Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Nilesh, you know, when I first started my podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, before that,
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't someone who listened to much audio, frankly, I didn't really have a habit of radio.
[Amit Varma]: So I figured as research, I should listen to some good podcasters and figure out what
[Amit Varma]: it's like.
[Amit Varma]: So someone recommended that you have to listen to Nilesh Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: And it was so intimidating, because I thought, my God, this man has such an incredible voice.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I heard your storytelling shows, and it was just so engrossing and brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: And normally, when I sort of research for an episode, I, you know, I enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: Often I have to read a bunch of books and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's good fun in its own way.
[Amit Varma]: But this was one of the most enjoyable episodes to research because I watched all your episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the Slow Interview, many of them many times, and absolutely loved it because conversation
[Amit Varma]: is so dear to my heart as well.
[Amit Varma]: And to see someone who is clearly a master of it was such a joy for me.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of start, you know, the way you often start, in fact, by talking about your
[Amit Varma]: early life, talking about your childhood, you know, where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What was that like?
[Guest]: I was born in Lucknow.
[Guest]: And at an early age, I went to Nainital.
[Guest]: So I did much of my preschooling, etc. there.
[Guest]: My father, at that time was teaching geology, his field has been geology at the university.
[Guest]: So I went to school there.
[Guest]: And it was a new world.
[Guest]: Because you're going to the hills and there are definitely some sort of perceptions about
[Guest]: outsiders.
[Guest]: And there was this need to belong, even as a child.
[Guest]: And also, because we were far away from home, for the first time, missing Lucknow, but more
[Guest]: than that, my Nainital and my childhood here.
[Guest]: And then I slowly adapted and started loving Nainital.
[Guest]: When I used to be in Lucknow, I used to say I'm from Nainital.
[Guest]: And when I was in Nainital, I used to say I'm from Lucknow.
[Guest]: So it was like a dual identity.
[Guest]: And I think I learned a lot of things unknowingly in Nainital, which came in handy later in
[Guest]: my career.
[Guest]: Most important, you know, everyday emotions.
[Guest]: And those small emotions that I could feel, which perhaps if I had grown up in a big city,
[Guest]: or even a relatively smaller city like Lucknow, I would have missed out.
[Guest]: Like one thing I remember is the sanctity of touch and spaces, individual spaces.
[Guest]: So when I went to Delhi, for example, for the first time, and wasn't traveling in buses,
[Guest]: standing, and fairly violated, because I had come from a place where there was a space,
[Guest]: this personal space.
[Guest]: So I went to the school called Bishop Shaw English Medium School.
[Guest]: It was right by the lake, and it's called Tallital.
[Guest]: Nainital has Tallital and Mallital, Tallital is the lower end of the lake, where we also
[Guest]: used to live.
[Guest]: And then after some time, I went to St. Joseph's College from class five, which was one of
[Guest]: the big sort of common schools there, and Nasiruddin Shah, and a lot of illustrious
[Guest]: people who were students.
[Guest]: So it was very aspirational for my parents at the time, not us, because we didn't know
[Guest]: that much.
[Guest]: And I remember, and I have a twin brother, we are fraternal twins, not identical, shellish.
[Guest]: So I remember that the session had started, and then we seemed to have missed out on the
[Guest]: admissions when our neighbor, Mrs. Shah, who used to teach at a school called St. Mary's,
[Guest]: they were like a brother and sister school.
[Guest]: She told us about it, and then my father went and met the principal.
[Guest]: And accidentally, he turned out to be from Newfoundland, Canada, where my father had
[Guest]: done his research.
[Guest]: And that's how it became a conversation starter, and we got in.
[Guest]: So I often look at these things about these beautiful coincidences of life.
[Guest]: What if he was not from Newfoundland?
[Guest]: Would my journey have been different?
[Guest]: And there I then, I was a shy, timid sort of a boy.
[Guest]: But in class seven, I think, for the first time, I started to come into my own when the
[Guest]: teacher one day said that he was choosing the class's debate team.
[Guest]: There used to be an interclass competition.
[Guest]: And I think on a whim, I raised my hand and then we were supposed to read out something
[Guest]: the next day and I got selected.
[Guest]: I mean, that again, I feel it was one of the invisible turning points in my life, because
[Guest]: I would have remained a very inward looking, very shy young person, but public speaking.
[Guest]: And then we won the gold medal that year, and it just gave me a lot of confidence.
[Guest]: Then I started to write for the college magazine, poems, etc.
[Guest]: I've never narrated this story of mine.
[Guest]: People keep saying that you should also have a slow interview.
[Guest]: So it's good to remember a lot of things.
[Guest]: And I was never good at sports.
[Guest]: I was a day scholar.
[Guest]: And that's a regret I think I had, because my classmates were, you know, they stayed
[Guest]: back for sports, it was a huge British era, you know, school with stone walls and big
[Unknown]: auditoriums and all that.
[Guest]: So they stayed back for boxing and athletics and etc.
[Guest]: And I think there was a feeling of, in Urdu there's a word, ahsaas se kam tari, kam hone
[Guest]: ka ahsaas.
[Guest]: I think that would have been there in some way, because I had joined the school in class
[Guest]: five and until class seven.
[Guest]: I was fairly okay in academics, but I mean, like I would be like among the top 10 students,
[Guest]: but not like, you know, first top three or something.
[Guest]: So the high of achievement, I would say that was not there until I started public speaking.
[Guest]: And that kind of filled up for the absence or the feeling of being inadequate in terms
[Guest]: of achievements in some way, now that I look back.
[Guest]: And that then set me off on to different things.
[Guest]: I remember one of my classmates was Sajeeb Wazid, whose mother, Haseena Wazid, was the
[Guest]: Prime Minister of Bangladesh later.
[Guest]: Sajeeb and I used to compete in English and sort of debates, etc, etc.
[Guest]: It was a great time, it was multicultural.
[Guest]: There was, of course, the Day Scholar border divide, and Day Scholars, I mean, the border
[Guest]: used to steal my lunch every day, they used to.
[Guest]: There was not bullying as you would call it today, but definitely, I mean, because they
[Guest]: were all from very rich families, and I was from an ordinary middle class family.
[Guest]: So there was also that sort of not an inferiority complex, but I was very aware of the fact
[Guest]: that there was a gap when school holidays started, their parents used to come in their
[Guest]: big cars, and we used to hear of their big farms and etc.
[Guest]: Somewhere all that was shaping who I was.
[Guest]: And after class 10, the question was what to do next, and I, because St. Joseph's was
[Guest]: only until class 10, so I moved back to Lucknow, again a big shift, because I was from a very
[Guest]: small town, and I didn't even know how to ride a bicycle.
[Guest]: I learned it after class 10, and then I had a grey bicycle, which I used to ride to my
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: My school was Mahanagar Boys.
[Guest]: Even Mahanagar Boys, I mean, I got an admission because that same neighbor, Mrs. Shah, Mrs.
[Guest]: Bhavna Shah, knew someone here, and you know, the way it happens in middle class India.
[Guest]: And when I came in, the first sort of thing that really bothered me was, I had come from
[Guest]: huge classrooms, where the desks were like, you know, five feet apart, and you owned your
[Guest]: space.
[Guest]: And here there was no space, you just crammed together in small rooms, and it was hot, and
[Guest]: it was just some other world.
[Guest]: And then I came and realized that the school had no college magazine.
[Guest]: So I wrote a long letter to the principal, Brother Mani, saying that, you know, I've
[Guest]: come from a place where I was writing regularly for our school magazine, and we should have
[Unknown]: a school magazine.
[Guest]: So well, he called me, and I think he found it very unusual that a boy would sort of,
[Guest]: he was very feared.
[Guest]: And he made me the student editor of the magazine.
[Guest]: So in some way, I mean, because I was disliking coming back and this new kind of school, which
[Guest]: would have been a normal for a lot of people if they had grown up in the city, because
[Guest]: cramped spaces, you know, small classrooms, but it was not normal for me.
[Guest]: So but this, maybe again, brought me back to the creative space and to showcase some
[Guest]: kind of achievement.
[Guest]: So we started the school magazine.
[Guest]: And at that time, I started a very oddly named group, and I don't know, looking back, I don't
[Guest]: know why I named it.
[Guest]: So it was called the Shower Club.
[Guest]: And I think I named it so because I thought it would be like a shower of ideas or something
[Guest]: that some silly reason.
[Guest]: So the idea was that to start, and I mean, looking back, to start something was brave,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But I was never like the outgoing kind of type A personality that later became in life.
[Guest]: At that point, I was these small acts of becoming the captain of the debate team in class seven
[Guest]: or writing that letter to brother money.
[Guest]: Those were unusual.
[Guest]: But I think it was beginning to, I was stepping out of my mental sort of cocoon, my threshold.
[Guest]: And so I found that and we formed a hierarchy.
[Guest]: I was the president, of course, and then there's a vice president and a treasurer, it was interesting.
[Guest]: And then we said, okay, we will do a debate competition, an inter-college debate competition.
[Guest]: So to me, it was great because I was doing something with public speaking, I was coming
[Guest]: back to that and also kind of scaling it up.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't know this phrase then, but for the other students, they would get to
[Guest]: go to the girls' schools and get to meet girls officially.
[Guest]: So by now, the college management and the principals trusted me enough to say, during
[Guest]: school time, in my school dress, we used to go to other schools, to Loreto Convent, to
[Guest]: there was an army public school here, to St. Francis, etc.
[Guest]: So we organized a debate competition and looking back, I don't know how I did it.
[Guest]: It was the year when I think some big anniversary of Jawaharlal Nehru was being organized and
[Guest]: the government was spending a lot of money to do a lot of cultural events.
[Guest]: So someone told me this, one of my mama's friends said, you're looking for a sponsor,
[Guest]: why don't you approach the cultural department to sponsor this debate competition?
[Guest]: So okay, well, we wrote, we had a letter pad, proper saying shower club, and this was the
[Guest]: typesetting era.
[Guest]: So it was made at that time.
[Guest]: So we went to the state secretariat and looking back, I think it was really brave.
[Guest]: So me in my school dress and my classmate Chandrashekhar Masiwal, who is now, should
[Guest]: be about to become a general in the army.
[Guest]: So both of us went on our bicycles and I don't know why they let us in, but they let us in,
[Guest]: they made a pass for us.
[Guest]: And then we went to the then secretary for culture is a gentleman called Atul Bagai,
[Guest]: which was my first interface with an IAS officer, with that world, with governance.
[Guest]: It was fascinating.
[Guest]: And he had a very peculiar habit.
[Guest]: He had like a pile of papers in front of him, he would sign and he would sign and throw
[Guest]: them behind him.
[Guest]: So they went like flying in the air and there were like 15 such papers and somebody would
[Guest]: come in later and collect them and it was very cinematic.
[Guest]: My first sort of view of the Indian bureaucracy was a very cinematic moment.
[Guest]: And so we had this letter, which I'm assuming he found very cute.
[Guest]: We had asked for 4000 rupees to sponsor this competition.
[Guest]: And so he signed it and okay, and then we'll, but when we went to look for a venue and I
[Guest]: wanted it to be in a really nice venue, so I went to this hotel called Clark's Awad,
[Guest]: which was then like the best hotel in Lucknow.
[Guest]: And they said, we will charge you whatever, some two, 3000 rupees per day.
[Guest]: I hope I'm not sounding very old to your listeners by saying so, which created a budget crunch.
[Guest]: So now the budget was coming to 6000.
[Guest]: So what do we do?
[Guest]: We went back to the same Atul Bagai who smiled and he said,
[Guest]: Samosa kam kar lo na, because we had given an entire breakdown to, you know, the letter
[Guest]: to the government said, itne samosa khilayenge, itna chai.
[Guest]: We thought just the government, you know, you had to give all the details.
[Guest]: So that happened.
[Guest]: And alongside, I had this fetish to start a magazine, which was again, oddly called
[Guest]: Shower.
[Guest]: So the Shower, and this is the cyclostyle era.
[Guest]: So I went up to my father one day, and he still remembers the story and I said, I said,
[Guest]: I want to start a printing press.
[Guest]: And he was a university professor, middle class family, never had anything to do with
[Guest]: business or never had a lot of money, or he found this very odd.
[Guest]: And also we lived in separate cities.
[Guest]: I mean, he was still in Nainital, you know, at the university, and I was here in Lucknow
[Guest]: at my Nainihal.
[Guest]: So when he came on, you know, one of the holidays, I said, I want to start a printing, he said,
[Guest]: why?
[Guest]: I said, I want to print a magazine.
[Guest]: So he said, well, go to another printing press and print it.
[Guest]: So then there was a, I don't know, I'm looking back, maybe those were entrepreneurial skills
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: Although I was never entrepreneurial in that sense.
[Guest]: So I went to one of the rich philanthropists called Mr. Gupta in Lucknow, who my mother
[Guest]: knew through some satsang or somewhere.
[Guest]: And he was considered a miser, he would never give anything.
[Guest]: My parents said, he won't give you a single rupee.
[Guest]: So and this is still a joke in my family.
[Guest]: So I convinced him and I said, this is what I want to do.
[Guest]: And he didn't give me money, but they had a paper mill or something.
[Guest]: So he gave me paper, like a lot of paper, so that helped.
[Guest]: And everybody said like, wow, you got paper out of Mr. Gupta.
[Guest]: I mean, he was a nice person, but obviously would want to see the ROI, you know, I didn't
[Guest]: know that.
[Guest]: And so then we, how do we illustrate?
[Guest]: So it was exciting.
[Guest]: And we took out a few issues.
[Guest]: I wrote something and some other contributors wrote, they used to send handwritten.
[Guest]: And then I started taking subscriptions for the magazine.
[Guest]: And the annual subscription, I think was 20 rupees or 50 rupees, something like that.
[Guest]: And I even conned my barber in Nainital into buying a subscription.
[Guest]: He had a classic haircutting saloon.
[Guest]: And what I did was I wrote a piece about him and there used to be this magazine called
[Guest]: Target Magazine at the time, published by Indya Today.
[Guest]: My first poem was called a Fisherman's Song.
[Guest]: It was published in Target Magazine.
[Guest]: And I remember the day because I had written to the editor.
[Guest]: I even remember her name, Rosalind Wilson was her name.
[Guest]: And I was in Nainital, in this small town and I had issued, I mean, I had written this
[Guest]: letter to the Living Media India office, F1415 Connaught Place.
[Guest]: And I sent her and then I got a letter from Rosalind Wilson saying, you know, your type
[Guest]: written letter on lovely paper, beautifully printed saying that your poem has been published
[Guest]: and it'll appear in the next.
[Guest]: I was delighted.
[Guest]: So every day, this is, I think I was still in class seven.
[Guest]: Every day I used to go to the Talital market, from my home to the bookshop, target magazine
[Guest]: and the moment it came, you know, I saw my name and I rushed back home because I wanted
[Guest]: to show it to my father.
[Guest]: And I think that was the inspiration to do something like start a magazine of my own
[Guest]: and which was like mad, but whatever.
[Guest]: But I had bought a subscription to Target.
[Guest]: So I thought, okay, let's do this.
[Guest]: So then I started regularly getting something or the other published in Target.
[Guest]: And one piece that I wrote was a very funny story called The Barber's Barber.
[Guest]: And it was basically about my barber and how he like shook me up and chumpy kiya yeh kiya
[Guest]: woh kiya.
[Guest]: And in that I had written Classic Haircutting Salon.
[Guest]: Now Classic Haircutting Salon was an actual place where I used to go to and that's where
[Guest]: I borrowed my name.
[Guest]: So Mahesh was the owner.
[Guest]: So when I was selling subscriptions, I went back to Mahesh and said, look, tumhari dukaan
[Guest]: ka maine ad kiya yaar, tumh subscription to kharid sakte ho mera.
[Guest]: He was thrilled.
[Guest]: I mean, he didn't realize that I had made fun of someone like him who was like a part
[Guest]: wrestler, part barber, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So he gave it, but we could never publish enough.
[Guest]: So it happened for some time that some friend was, yaar tumhari magazine kab aa rahi hai
[Guest]: aur o paisa gaya tha maine.
[Guest]: So I used to avoid many people, maybe about 20-30 people, because we were afraid that
[Guest]: they would ask us for the subscription money or the magazine.
[Guest]: And my brother Shailesh was also a sort of party to this.
[Guest]: And although he had no creative interest, he works for Adobe, he's a tech guy.
[Guest]: So that's how, I mean, those little seeds of public speaking or kind of some writing,
[Guest]: some publishing, those were happening.
[Guest]: And then class 11, 12, after in Mahanagar Boys, and then I came back to Nainital to
[Guest]: pursue graduation.
[Guest]: Why this happened is an interesting story.
[Guest]: So my father wanted me, like a lot of fathers of that time, to become a doctor.
[Guest]: And I had zero interest in science.
[Guest]: But because he wanted me to, and this was a prestigious school, Mahanagar Boys was one
[Guest]: of the best schools in class 11 at the time.
[Guest]: So I joined the biology stream and I was hitting it and, you know, we used to have to cut frogs
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: We had to go to these shops where you used to buy frogs and I was terrified of seeing
[Guest]: blood.
[Guest]: Still I am.
[Guest]: And so I, it was just starting out, the start of class 11 and I thought like, I mean, where
[Guest]: am I stuck?
[Guest]: So the first parent-teacher meeting happened.
[Guest]: And our class teacher was Mrs. Vimla Mishra, very tough, very, very stern.
[Guest]: Everybody was really scared of her, barely spoke, barely smiled, very respected.
[Guest]: So my father sat there and Mrs. Mishra and it was a, I think the meeting was in a science
[Guest]: lab or somewhere.
[Guest]: From the first few minutes of that session, I said the unspeakable, or I said, ma'am,
[Guest]: I don't want to take science, they forced me to take it.
[Guest]: My father all this while thought up his wily plan to tackle with this unprecedented situation.
[Guest]: So as we left, he said,
[Guest]: So it was a very wily trick that he had come up with sitting there, which would make me
[Guest]: study hard if I had to win the life I wanted.
[Guest]: And there was biology, there was physics, it was an alien world for me, I did not relate
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: And while all of my classmates were pursuing their dream careers, they wanted to be doctors
[Guest]: and engineers, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: So I, you know, I studied hard and I did get a first division, I think I got 74%, which
[Guest]: would be considered very high at the time, although, you know, there were toppers, like
[Guest]: the UP topper would be from Mahanadar Boys, it was that kind of an institution.
[Guest]: And then my father kept his word.
[Guest]: So then I said that I want to study the arts.
[Guest]: So each boy in my class wrote the CPMT exam to become a doctor.
[Guest]: And I was the only one who didn't.
[Guest]: And my father said,
[Guest]: I think he was still clutching at straws.
[Guest]: So I said, look, if I write the exam and get through,
[Guest]: and if I don't get through, I will live with a sense of defeat.
[Guest]: So I didn't write the exam, I was the only boy in my class who did not write that exam.
[Guest]: And then, of course, like I said, he kept his word, I went back to Nainital, I joined
[Guest]: the BA course with history, political science and literature.
[Guest]: This was also, I think he had a thought, because now that I had given up on medicine, he wanted
[Guest]: me to write the IS exam.
[Guest]: And these three subjects seemed fit towards that journey.
[Guest]: I topped my university.
[Guest]: And that was a great time.
[Guest]: I used to sing, you know, with friends, we used to, there were competitions.
[Guest]: I think I was gathering the moments that would later appear in my storytelling.
[Guest]: I used to go for long walks along the lake.
[Guest]: For the first time I was experiencing female attention, that was also new.
[Guest]: Because until this point, and I used to be very, very skinny growing up.
[Guest]: So both my brother and I had a huge complex about it.
[Guest]: We never wore t-shirts, because we were like so thin.
[Guest]: It was a big deal when I would have first started wearing t-shirts.
[Guest]: I'm sure every skinny boy or girl would relate to it.
[Guest]: But some, you know, one interesting thing had happened alongside, which was that when
[Guest]: I was in class, I think around class 12 or so, still in Lucknow, I used to, like I said,
[Guest]: go by bicycle to my school.
[Guest]: And on the way, there is a big intersection called Burlington Chauraha.
[Guest]: So on Burlington, there was the office of Swatantra Bharat and Pioneer, which were then
[Guest]: big newspapers.
[Guest]: Swatantra Bharat was huge, as big as Danyag Jagran today.
[Guest]: It was like a household paper.
[Guest]: And Pioneer had just kind of started and it was also with its modern design.
[Guest]: It was also a new, refreshing sort of alternate to Hindustan Times or Times of India.
[Guest]: It was interesting.
[Guest]: It was like what Asian Age was perceived as in Delhi when it came.
[Guest]: So one day, I used to look at this building every day, and one day I mustered the courage
[Guest]: and I went into that building.
[Guest]: And I walked up to the person, you know, the first person I saw, who had a thick beard
[Guest]: and he was sitting and his head was a table and as luck would have it, he was the features
[Guest]: editor called Ravi Verma, deep voice.
[Guest]: And again, I had gone in my school uniform.
[Guest]: So it was an unusual sight for him to see a boy in a school uniform come up.
[Guest]: And he said, so I said, I want to write in the newspaper.
[Guest]: So he looked at me top to bottom and he said, and maybe boys in small towns at that time
[Guest]: didn't do these things, didn't go up, didn't start magazines, didn't go up to the features
[Guest]: editor, etc.
[Guest]: And he asked me to write a piece.
[Guest]: At the same time, I went in to meet the editor of the Pioneer.
[Guest]: It was the first time I had met a newspaper editor-in-chief.
[Guest]: And I had written something and he said, okay, where's the story?
[Guest]: So I was quite offended because he had called it a story.
[Guest]: I didn't know that a news story is called a story.
[Guest]: I thought he's calling it fiction.
[Guest]: I said, it's not a story, it's news.
[Guest]: So which he found endearing.
[Guest]: And then when he saw it, he said, well, if you want to come work for us someday, come
[Guest]: back after you finish school.
[Guest]: So then I started writing regularly for both of them.
[Guest]: And that's how I was starting to earn.
[Guest]: My first earnings started.
[Guest]: And the first thing I bought was Philips.
[Guest]: It had these twin cassette recorders.
[Guest]: So you started one and then it would stop and the other one would play.
[Guest]: A lot of your listeners will not know what we're talking about.
[Guest]: I think it was called a double deck, if I remember correctly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It was called a double deck.
[Guest]: It was a big deal to get it.
[Guest]: So the aspirational piece for me.
[Guest]: And I saved money.
[Guest]: I used to get about 400-500 rupees per piece.
[Guest]: My first piece was Sunday magazine front page full story.
[Guest]: So it was a good debut and then I got spoiled.
[Guest]: I only wrote cover stories for them.
[Guest]: And I think because I didn't know journalism or I didn't know feature writing, I didn't
[Guest]: know how to write a piece.
[Guest]: I was doing it in my own way.
[Guest]: This was the time of the first Iraq war in Kuwait.
[Guest]: And looking back, this has been my strength in anything I've undertaken, which is I have
[Guest]: no baggage of convention.
[Guest]: I don't know how things are done.
[Guest]: So when I start doing something, which is new, I don't know how it's done.
[Guest]: So I do it my way.
[Guest]: So I didn't know how articles are written.
[Guest]: So I was writing like my, you know, there was a piece on snowfall and Nainital and first
[Guest]: person piece.
[Guest]: My first piece, I think, and I was telling Chang the other day on my show, The Slow Cafe.
[Guest]: It was about Indian, Chinese, the community dentists and in the beauty business, etc.
[Guest]: So it was interesting that I was starting to go to, and you know, the act of reporting
[Guest]: is not an easy act.
[Guest]: You go to somebody, you have them evoke enough trust in you to open up and you listen to
[Guest]: them carefully.
[Guest]: So one of the things that came in handy later in my career, I became a good listener.
[Guest]: I think I'm a damn good listener where I'm genuinely interested in the other person.
[Guest]: And all this started at that time.
[Guest]: So my mother one day said, she had a favorite tailor called Akram, who had vanished because
[Guest]: he went away to Kuwait.
[Guest]: And one day she said, Akram is back.
[Guest]: She was very delighted.
[Guest]: What happened?
[Guest]: So we linked back that I went up to Ravi Verma and I said, I want to do a story on Indians
[Guest]: who are returning after the, and so this was very unusual for him and something that his
[Guest]: own reporters had not thought of.
[Guest]: So to be able to, you know, we were getting like a human face of a top international story,
[Guest]: which was in the news at the time.
[Guest]: So I did that.
[Guest]: So I saved money, so about, I think 8,000 or something is what the double-decker cost
[Guest]: me at the time, 8 or 10,000.
[Guest]: And I used to listen to Jagjit Singh Ghazals and Ghulam Ali Ghazals and me and my father
[Guest]: were living alone in Nainital at the time.
[Guest]: My mother was looking after our village school.
[Guest]: And my brother was in Lucknow and he had chosen to be here.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think that's a very long answer to your short question.
[Amit Varma]: It's a delightful answer and there are many strands I want to unpack and ask you about.
[Amit Varma]: No, I was, you know, I'm born in the same year as you, a few months later.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of what you were saying made me nostalgic in a different way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously I wasn't in Nainital, but I was a day scholar in a school which had
[Amit Varma]: a lot of borders in Pune, the Bishop School.
[Amit Varma]: And otherwise, another thing that sort of struck me about what you were saying was your
[Amit Varma]: memory for these small, small details.
[Amit Varma]: And I just realized that I might not remember what happened last week so clearly.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, when you talk of writing, you know, posting a letter to F14, F15, Connaught
[Amit Varma]: Place and all of that, it's just, you know, I can see why those would kind of stick out
[Amit Varma]: in your mind.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a bunch of questions, I'll go through them one by one.
[Amit Varma]: One is, you know, I read in, I heard rather in, I think you were interviewing Warren Grover.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was in that one where you, oh, I forget which one it was, but you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: how thin you were and that also struck a chord because something that I often tell people,
[Amit Varma]: which they can't believe looking at me now, is that I was so thin in college that I didn't
[Unknown]: like wearing t-shirts.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, my quip about that is I would step out of my hostel.
[Amit Varma]: And if I was wearing a t-shirt, I would not want the wind to blow against me because you
[Amit Varma]: could count my ribs.
[Amit Varma]: So depending on which way the wind was blowing, I would go either to the tapri or to the canteen.
[Amit Varma]: And I was quite sort of moved by your story about, you know, how, when, you know, boarders
[Amit Varma]: used to take your tiffin, you've mentioned in another of your conversations, that in
[Amit Varma]: a sense, you felt good that, you know, you're having the same food as them, that kind of
[Amit Varma]: sense of fitting in and belonging in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that, you know, one of the early anxieties that we have as people that
[Amit Varma]: we never quite lose, that is very hard to lose.
[Amit Varma]: I think I probably, you know, managed to control it in my middle age, is that anxiety of what
[Amit Varma]: other people think of you, you know, that desire for validation and you want to fit
[Amit Varma]: in and you want to be part of the crowd.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I kind of totally get that at the same level.
[Amit Varma]: And so it was interesting to me that all of these things that you did, whether it was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the debating in school, or whether it was, you know, sort of taking the initiative
[Amit Varma]: to start a magazine in your next school, when you went to Lucknow, and all of that, that
[Amit Varma]: do you think that this, you know, your artistic expression and your ways of doing that now,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you loved, I'm sure you loved writing, and you love debating and all of that, and
[Amit Varma]: you were just being true to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, was all of that also a way of fitting in?
[Amit Varma]: And a larger question is that, you know, at what point did you sort of like, I know, you're
[Amit Varma]: a very self reflective man, that's very obvious from the conversations you have.
[Amit Varma]: At what point did you become aware of this kind of anxiety, and begin to become comfortable
[Amit Varma]: in your own skin and sort of, you know, coming to terms with all of that?
[Guest]: I think when I was in school in St. Joseph's, there was this feeling of being an outsider,
[Guest]: because in Nainital itself, there was the feeling of being an outsider.
[Guest]: I have a lot of amazing local friends, and I mean, I sort of like I said, I'm half Pahari,
[Guest]: I count myself as half Pahari, but maybe that's where this thing started of trying to fit
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: If I had grown up in Lucknow, it would be different, I probably would be a different
[Guest]: person, and then school, where A, boarders were definitely a notch higher than day scholars,
[Guest]: which was very clear in the school hierarchy.
[Guest]: Plus, they were very well to do, you know, well off boarders.
[Guest]: So being aware that you're not as prosperous as them, but the equalizers were small, being
[Guest]: the captain of the debating team and winning the gold was one equalizer, you know, starting
[Guest]: that club, because even when I came here, all my classmates were from very rich families.
[Guest]: They would have a scooter, and there were no cars then, but they would have that grey
[Guest]: Yamaha bike, and those were the signs of being rich at the time for a student.
[Guest]: When I started doing new things or taking initiatives, maybe it was my defense, maybe
[Guest]: it was a way to stand out, make a mark, to sort of go against the current.
[Guest]: Looking back, I seriously don't know where that courage came from, because it would have
[Guest]: required courage.
[Guest]: I was in a school in Lucknow, where the only thing valued was studies, because they were
[Guest]: all potential toppers in the state, and it was a school of very intelligent students.
[Guest]: And I was not a very intelligent student as academics go.
[Guest]: So maybe that was my way of standing out.
[Guest]: But what it did was that, and again, I'm analyzing that now today, because you asked me this,
[Guest]: and maybe those little milestones, those little successes, gradually transformed me from being
[Guest]: a person who's trying to fit in, to a person who's doing small innovations to lead in some
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: And I mean, how would a boy in class 11 have the courage to go into the imposing state
[Guest]: secretariat building, to even walk in, to even get that pass made?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, it surprises me, looking back.
[Guest]: But after that time, when I saw that my ideas were sort of elbowing their way, that the
[Guest]: school principal would suddenly feel good, because something I did, I would go to debate
[Guest]: competitions in other schools, and we would win.
[Guest]: And then at the school assembly, he would honor me.
[Guest]: This was new.
[Guest]: This was quite amazing.
[Guest]: So I think in doing these things, it was emboldening me in some way to do new things.
[Guest]: And maybe that is what gave me the courage, later in life, to do even far more risky things
[Guest]: and far more crazy things.
[Guest]: And if I had followed the safe route, the correct route, if I had given that medical
[Guest]: examination, my life would be different, I would be different.
[Guest]: So maybe these were the little, I was chipping away at my own destiny, at what was to be
[Guest]: the destiny of this regular, ordinary, middle class boy with medium level grades.
[Guest]: But hey, here were these two, three things which I could also do, and then that made
[Guest]: me stand out in some way.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's, you know, you mentioned the word destiny, and it also strikes me as how
[Amit Varma]: contingent, you know, the direction our life takes can often become on little things, like
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out, going to Nainital.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess, you know, it's also resonant to me that you would tell your Lucknow friends
[Amit Varma]: that you're from Nainital and vice versa, because you're a different person then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just because, you know, made that shift.
[Amit Varma]: And that's so fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that sort of struck me about, you know, your background, which is very interesting
[Amit Varma]: is your father's idealism, in a sense, that, you know, he started in Newfoundland in Canada,
[Amit Varma]: and but he wants to give something back to his society.
[Amit Varma]: And he actually, you know, I was looking him up on Wikipedia and elsewhere, and he's noted
[Amit Varma]: for fossil discoveries.
[Amit Varma]: And even in that young career, he had, you know, already started making a mark.
[Amit Varma]: But he decides he wants to give back to society.
[Amit Varma]: And he comes back to this village near Lucknow, and, you know, looks after the school and
[Amit Varma]: runs the school.
[Amit Varma]: And did some of that idealism rub off on you in the sense that I know that when we are
[Amit Varma]: growing up, everything about our parents is normal.
[Amit Varma]: Even if they are extraordinary, we won't think of it as extraordinary.
[Amit Varma]: So it sort of, and this is also like what your father did this act of great idealism
[Amit Varma]: saying that, you know, I will not do the supposedly conventional sensible thing in picking a career,
[Amit Varma]: I will come back and do this also seems at odds, in a sense, with his personality as
[Amit Varma]: a father when he's telling you, nahi beta medical karo or nahi beta IAS karo and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: So one was there an awareness of this and was this sense of, you know, the fact that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your father himself was so principled, was there an awareness of that and did that
[Amit Varma]: then also in some way of osmosis or whatever rub off on the way you approached your life?
[Guest]: For sure.
[Guest]: And like you said, when we were growing up, we don't realize any of this.
[Guest]: But my childhood was, I mean, I used to be in Nainital, my mother, like I said, was in
[Guest]: Lucknow.
[Guest]: And what were their conversations when they spoke to each other on the phone, which was
[Guest]: at our landlord's place, they were not romantic conversations.
[Guest]: They were about, wo truck aa raha tha, yeh taga wo rub gaya hai wahan pe, accha wo falana
[Guest]: wo vazifa aa ya hai.
[Guest]: It was like, it was shop talk, it was just everything was about the school.
[Guest]: And as I was addressing students recently at our village school, and I said that, hamara
[Guest]: toh thoda khiska hua parivaar hai, we're just nuts.
[Guest]: This is not an ordinary family.
[Guest]: Because our conversations, even our family group, like me, my parents and my brother,
[Guest]: it's named after the school, like what next for BGV or something like that.
[Guest]: So I grew up, the uncertainties were how to run the school, I used to listen in, we used
[Guest]: to go spend time there in the village whenever we could.
[Guest]: I remember falling sick, and I had high fever because the decoits had attacked a hut two
[Guest]: homes away.
[Guest]: So it was a very different kind of life.
[Guest]: It was, while we were city boys, but we were acutely aware of our rural connection.
[Guest]: And it was normalized.
[Guest]: So there was no looking down on rural India.
[Guest]: And later, now that I look back, me pursuing my journey in journalism, then going to Bombay,
[Guest]: and then giving it all up and coming back to Lucknow.
[Guest]: And then even that now, living mostly in my village, is the same kind of return that my
[Guest]: father did from Canada.
[Guest]: And when I gave up my life in Bombay, I was not following any script, I was not following
[Guest]: a journey, I was not saying, oh, I'm inspired by my father.
[Guest]: I just did it, you know, without thinking.
[Guest]: But looking back, yes, I gave up a lot of things when I returned from Bombay.
[Guest]: As my career there in the films was kind of taking off, I was meeting top directors and
[Guest]: you know, top composers, etc.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think somewhere, definitely there was this osmosis, for sure.
[Amit Varma]: And was your father proud when you bought that double deck and you know, with the money
[Amit Varma]: that you earned doing your freelance journalism and all that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I could see that he was proud that I was kind of, that in college people would
[Guest]: know me, that his fellow teachers would talk about me.
[Guest]: That was new.
[Guest]: And by this time, I mean, to give him credit.
[Guest]: So I've written a story called Papa Se Shart, which what happened was in the season one
[Guest]: of my show, a lot of students from Kota, there's a huge listenership for my show in Kota.
[Guest]: So they used to say that we are very stressed, can you please narrate a story from your life,
[Guest]: which is uplifting.
[Guest]: So I said, well, there's hardly anything uplifting in that sense.
[Guest]: But yeah, there's this story.
[Guest]: So I wrote a story called Papa Se Shart, which was about that bet, which my father lost.
[Guest]: And then at the end, I had my father on the phone, and he says that I'm really happy that
[Guest]: I lost that bet.
[Guest]: And I would ask all parents to not force their ambitions on their children.
[Guest]: So it was very, you know, interesting, because so by this time, he had realized that this
[Guest]: was my calling, that that was an alien world for me, I was really enjoying, I was coming
[Guest]: into my own in the arts, and getting recognition.
[Guest]: And then he used to say, he'll make his way, is what sort of he used to tell.
[Guest]: So I think my maverick ways, and my unusual unorthodox ways is something that by that
[Guest]: time, he was quite comfortable with.
[Guest]: And he never stopped me from anything in my life after that, I never had to make any decisions
[Guest]: keeping his desires in mind, because he never expressed or imposed desires of any kind.
[Amit Varma]: Perfect.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then when we come back, we'll, you know, go down the rest of your journey.
[Amit Varma]: All right.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also wants to write better?
[Amit Varma]: If so, I have something for you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April this year, I've been teaching an online course called the art of clear writing
[Amit Varma]: for webinars spread out over four Saturdays, in which I share whatever I've learned about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a professional writer.
[Amit Varma]: The course also contains many writing exercises, discussions on email and WhatsApp and much
[Amit Varma]: interactivity.
[Amit Varma]: It costs rupees 10,000 or $150.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the details at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: This link will be in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the
[Amit Varma]: page, then the art of clear writing might be just what you need.
[Amit Varma]: November batches begin on Saturday, November 7th.
[Amit Varma]: So hurry and register before then, indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen I'm chatting with Nilesh Mishra, you could say
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing a slow interview of Nilesh Mishra if I may be audacious enough to say something
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: So Nilesh, you know, where we left off on your sort of journey.
[Amit Varma]: And besides your journey, of course, I'll have a lot of broader questions, which we'll
[Amit Varma]: explore as we go through this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But where we left off on the journey was, you know, you're in Nainital, you're in college,
[Amit Varma]: you're writing for the Pioneer and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, from there, how do you sort of move on and become a full time journalist?
[Amit Varma]: How do you kind of get into that career?
[Amit Varma]: And is that what you wanted to do, like your conception of what I want to do in life?
[Amit Varma]: Was that more to just a general thing of being an artist and, you know, the journalism just
[Amit Varma]: came along and it seemed to make sense?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, did you specifically, you know, think about journalism and get excited about
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: No, I never wanted to become a journalist.
[Guest]: And I never had a very good view of journalists.
[Guest]: I used to call them magnified stenographers, is the phrase I used to use at that time.
[Guest]: So what happened was that I did my graduation and then came to Delhi, which was a new chapter
[Guest]: in my life.
[Guest]: I had been only once to Delhi when I came to meet the same Rosalind Wilson who wrote
[Guest]: me that letter.
[Guest]: So I had come to Connaught Place to meet her.
[Guest]: But apart from that, I'd never sort of spent any time and the huge roads, it was a completely
[Guest]: different world for me.
[Guest]: And I stayed as a paying guest for about a year while I was preparing for my IAS preliminary
[Guest]: exam.
[Guest]: And I used to get these brilliant tutorials, these big packets that came.
[Guest]: And two or three days before the exam, I started getting some very excruciating pain in my
[Guest]: ears.
[Guest]: And it didn't go away.
[Guest]: And I wrote my exam like that.
[Guest]: And I didn't get through.
[Guest]: And my father said, and thank God I didn't get through.
[Guest]: Now when I talk to young people, I always tell them about my failures.
[Guest]: Did you want to get through?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: In fact, I didn't even know what it entailed, what, because I was from Nainital.
[Guest]: I mean, I had heard that Delhi boys do this thing called TOEFL and SAT and how they go
[Guest]: to study abroad.
[Guest]: And I used to feel quite awful that I didn't know how to do it, where to apply, what to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And the same was there for IAS, that I didn't know what happens when you, is it the name
[Guest]: of a job?
[Guest]: I mean, what is it?
[Guest]: So I wrote that exam.
[Guest]: Of course, I mean, of course, during that year, I understood what it is, but it wasn't
[Guest]: really a life of my choosing, but then there was no alternate life to be seen.
[Guest]: And I didn't know then that a career could be made out of creativity.
[Guest]: It had to be that thing you do on the side, as it is for millions of people.
[Guest]: So I didn't get through.
[Guest]: And then I was devastated because I'd studied a whole year for it.
[Guest]: Then I wrote the international relations exam in JNU, and I didn't get through.
[Guest]: And thank God I didn't.
[Guest]: And at that time, when I was at a low, you know, my lowest ever in life, because I had
[Guest]: come from Nainital and spent money and let down my parents, in my view, they never said
[Guest]: it so, but that's how I saw it.
[Guest]: So I joined French classes in Bharti Vidya Bhavan, as something I was doing on the side
[Guest]: while I was figuring out what to do next.
[Guest]: And after the classes, I used to go to Janpath where there were these two or three shops
[Guest]: which used to sell cheese sandwiches.
[Guest]: And because like every other student, my eating habits were all over the place, there was
[Guest]: no fixed time.
[Guest]: So that used to be like my lunch at whatever time of the day.
[Guest]: And that's when one day I saw a boy coming towards me who I realized was my classmate
[Guest]: called Gaurav Agarwal, classmate from Mahanagar Boys, from class 11-12.
[Guest]: And then we got talking, we met, we were both living then in Noida, and he said he had two
[Guest]: forms for the Indian Institute of Mass Communication.
[Guest]: And I said, I don't want to become a journalist.
[Guest]: I think journalists are lousy, they're magnified stenographers.
[Guest]: He said, I have a form, take it, do it.
[Guest]: So I wrote that exam and he didn't get through, I got through.
[Guest]: I mean, again, my life is full of beautiful coincidences, beautiful coincidences.
[Guest]: What if I had not seen Gaurav Agarwal at that moment, having sandwich at that place, whatever
[Guest]: it was, Deepawls or something it was called.
[Amit Varma]: I used to love the cold coffee at Deepawls.
[Amit Varma]: I was in Delhi at that time as well for a brief while, for a year.
[Guest]: And so I got in, I remember I was then in Nainital, I got this brown government letter,
[Guest]: you know, a brown envelope, an official letter, which said that I had made it and after these
[Guest]: two big setbacks, not making it to the IAS and then the JNU, this is something that salvaged
[Guest]: some amount of pride at a difficult time.
[Guest]: So I went, and when I went, so I was not sure because there were, I mean, 50% seats were
[Guest]: reserved of the remaining, we knew that a lot of pushes and pulls happen, calls from
[Guest]: the information broadcasting ministry, this seat, that seat.
[Guest]: So there were 36 seats in all.
[Guest]: And of that, there were like six or seven seats nationally that we were competing for.
[Guest]: So according to statistically, it was almost as tough as making it to the IAS.
[Guest]: So I was very nervous also, because I didn't want to fail this one more time.
[Guest]: And everything depended on the interview.
[Guest]: And when I came for the interview, I had like my weapon, which was all the articles I had
[Guest]: written for Ravi Verma, since class 11.
[Guest]: When I was studying for the IAS in Delhi, I had been writing for Mainstream, that magazine
[Guest]: that used to come out at that time.
[Guest]: So I had a big sort of thick bundle of things I had written.
[Guest]: And I was confident that, agar yaha bemaani nahi hoti, toh mujhe koi rok nahi sakta hai.
[Guest]: That's what I told myself as I walked into that room.
[Guest]: And it was a good interview.
[Guest]: I was happy.
[Guest]: And some days later, I was told that I was in.
[Guest]: I learned pretty much nothing at IMC.
[Guest]: And I was in the print journalism.
[Guest]: Later, they invited me as a guest lecturer after some time.
[Guest]: And I went back and I very tactlessly said this to the director's face, that yaha maine
[Guest]: kuch seekha nahi.
[Guest]: It was a very cinematic moment.
[Guest]: They used to give these checks of 500 to 1000 rupees.
[Guest]: The registrar was slipping her hand, sliding the envelope towards me.
[Guest]: When I said the sentence, yaha kuch nahi hota, the hand stopped in the middle of the table.
[Guest]: Very awkward moment again.
[Guest]: Once more, something very interesting happened, which was that when the course was about to
[Guest]: end, our professor, Professor M. R. Dua, was lining up internships for everybody, which
[Guest]: was compulsory.
[Guest]: So I went up to my professor and I said, sir, aap mere liye internship mat dhoondiyega.
[Guest]: This was a very subversive thing to say, because all other students were dependent on Professor
[Guest]: Dua to find them internships.
[Guest]: And there was this shit of a boy coming and saying, don't look for it.
[Guest]: So I was confident that I would find it on my own.
[Guest]: And in the phone directory, I found the number for Reuters.
[Guest]: And Reuters was at 1 Kautilya Mark in Delhi's diplomatic enclave.
[Guest]: And I reached out to this burly seven foot Irish bureau chief, as I later discovered,
[Guest]: Paul Iredale.
[Guest]: And Paul gave me a date to come and meet him, and a time which I did not understand because
[Guest]: I didn't understand his accent.
[Guest]: So I went at some other time to meet him and he was waiting and he was very upset.
[Guest]: So I said, I'm really sorry and da-da-da, and again, that whole bunch of clippings and
[Guest]: everything and I had taken.
[Guest]: So anyway, he gave me the internship.
[Guest]: And he told me to join on the 1st of April.
[Guest]: I started my career on the 1st, on Fool's Day.
[Guest]: And as it turned out, when the final exam roster came, that the last paper was on the
[Guest]: 1st of April, which was broadcast journalism.
[Guest]: Now, I had no courage to go back to that seven foot Paul Iredale, whose accent I didn't understand,
[Guest]: and to explain to him once again that, you know, this has happened.
[Guest]: Can you move that meeting to whatever, just the next day?
[Guest]: And secondly, I thought to myself, and I remember it was very, very logical thinking.
[Guest]: I said, look, why did I do this IMC course?
[Guest]: You know, I did it for practical knowledge and a job.
[Guest]: Where is my likelihood greater of getting a job?
[Guest]: Is it by writing that exam or is it by doing this internship?
[Guest]: Because at least I'm getting to show what I know, there's a greater likelihood of them
[Guest]: hiring me, right?
[Guest]: So do I want that piece of paper?
[Guest]: No, I don't want that piece of paper.
[Guest]: So I was the only boy, once again, in my class, like in class 12, I had not written the CPMT
[Guest]: exam for medical.
[Guest]: I was again the only boy to not write this exam.
[Guest]: And everybody said, you're nuts.
[Guest]: Why did you study all this way?
[Guest]: I said, I can't give up this internship.
[Guest]: And then I did the internship and then I got my first job at India Abroad, which was this
[Guest]: expatriate paper for, it then used to have an edition in London also, apart from US editions.
[Guest]: And a lot of my friends who joined other places, they looked at me as this fool, like what
[Guest]: had I done?
[Guest]: Then they had their convocation and they took pictures in their black hats and of course
[Guest]: I was not there.
[Guest]: So that well, I was not getting any degree and they said, well, we missed you and how
[Guest]: foolish of you to do this.
[Guest]: But two to three years later, I got a call from IMC and they said, well, we wanted to
[Guest]: give you that degree.
[Guest]: And I said, I'm not going to write any exam.
[Guest]: They said, no, don't write any exam.
[Guest]: But I don't know why they called.
[Guest]: It was out of the blue, out of the blue.
[Guest]: That same professor called Dr. Raghav Chari and I said, sir, I can't write any exam.
[Guest]: So he said, give me something for the file, some newspaper article, something or the others
[Guest]: just give it to me.
[Guest]: So I gave it and they gave my degree finally, you know, it added up.
[Guest]: And then I, at India Abroad, I started my journey, but now I started liking journalism
[Guest]: because this was a different kind of journalism.
[Guest]: It was big.
[Guest]: I mean, if I had not interned at Reuters, for example, if it was somewhere else, my
[Guest]: distaste for journalism would have continued, but it was, I was really enjoying it.
[Guest]: And I had amazing, I mean, one of my seniors there was Narayanan Madhavan, so Gurudev
[Guest]: hai humare ko.
[Guest]: So there were, you know, a couple of others, Rahul Sharma, who is now a dear friend, he
[Guest]: was the Deputy Director General of FICCI until recently and Editor-in-Chief of Khaleej Times.
[Guest]: So I learned a lot.
[Guest]: I was like the youngest there by many, many years.
[Guest]: I learned a lot at Reuters and the same at India Abroad because they were also writing
[Guest]: for an international audience.
[Guest]: So there, the storytelling, the craft, all of that was like really good.
[Guest]: And so, and because I was the youngest and everybody else was senior, there was a gentleman
[Guest]: called K.S.
[Guest]: Nair, amazing, amazing person, a guru to me, who was there and he lives in Kerala back
[Guest]: home now.
[Guest]: Tarun Basu, of course, was my first boss, K.P.K Kutty, who was earlier the Editor-in-Chief
[Guest]: of UNI, he was there.
[Guest]: So all the running around assignments, I started doing.
[Guest]: So and there was so much happening at the time.
[Guest]: My first sort of outstation assignment was the mid-air collision, Charkhi Dadri.
[Guest]: And I remember, and I was getting very little money.
[Guest]: So I was living in like a seven quarter, like this little room outside.
[Guest]: I remember getting a call at that point and rushing to Charkhi Dadri in the middle of
[Guest]: the night and walking in this field where there was this debris on one side and walking
[Guest]: over limbs that were dismembered, etc., etc.
[Guest]: It kind of catapulted me into another universe completely, because it was like being thrown
[Guest]: into the deep end.
[Guest]: It was not like you reported on the municipal corporation and a little bit of this beat
[Guest]: and that beat.
[Guest]: And finally you got, I was given like the biggest assignment right away.
[Guest]: It was the top global story and I was doing it.
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao was being tried at that time in the Hawala case, Sanket's trial was happening,
[Guest]: Bofors trial was happening, Chandra Swamy.
[Guest]: I mean, these names that we were heard were right there before our eyes, Narsimha Rao
[Guest]: would be sitting there, Chandra Swamy would be sitting there.
[Guest]: So I grew very fast as a journalist in my head, because it involved very, very responsible
[Guest]: journalism.
[Guest]: I couldn't go wrong on anything.
[Guest]: And I started really loving my job and the fact that there was no beat.
[Guest]: The fact that it was about the long form, it was about storytelling.
[Guest]: And so I worked at India Abroad for three years and then I was looking around for a
[Guest]: job and many places I went to, they said, you know, we love your work, we don't have
[Guest]: a position.
[Guest]: The position that we have is kind of beneath you, it's like maybe an intern or something.
[Guest]: And now I wonder, for example, there was an ad for Time Magazine, Tim McGurk used to be
[Guest]: there and BBC, William Woodridge was there.
[Guest]: And they all said, you know, we love this, we love your work, but we don't have a full
[Guest]: time position.
[Guest]: And what if I had taken that, you know, that stringer position at Time Magazine, I would
[Guest]: have gotten confirmed in a few years, right?
[Guest]: And become full time.
[Guest]: And then who knows where in the world I would be or join the BBC.
[Guest]: So I mean, again, paths that I did not take, which I could easily have taken, which would
[Guest]: have paid me more than I was getting at the time, etc.
[Guest]: So at that time, I went to the AP, the Associated Press, and when I went there, they made me
[Guest]: write an exam.
[Guest]: I remember my news editor was Donna Bryson, a very, very warm, affectionate, African American
[Guest]: lady, such an amazing, amazing woman.
[Guest]: And I wrote my, not an exam, she just gave me a story to edit, and I edited it.
[Guest]: And she said, well, I don't know, I don't know what to say, it's like ready to go.
[Guest]: You just got the style right.
[Guest]: Because I was already writing for an overseas audience, so I was getting all the background
[Guest]: and context, everything.
[Guest]: So I started working at the AP, and immediately what happened is the nuclear test.
[Guest]: This is 1995.
[Guest]: Vajpayee government, nuclear tests.
[Guest]: And now, after, so firstly, I started long form.
[Guest]: And now I'm in the business of like immediate journalism of immediacy, where, and this is
[Guest]: way before breaking news, but, or I mean, what we have by way of breaking news today,
[Guest]: but we were competing against AFP and Reuters for minutes every day.
[Guest]: And now I look back and laugh at it.
[Guest]: I mean, nobody gave a damn about who reported what one minute in advance, but one minute
[Guest]: would be like a lifetime.
[Guest]: And there used to be this little chart, a long chart actually, that used to come every
[Guest]: day from our Asia office and then from the New York office about who had so many stories
[Guest]: published in which paper.
[Guest]: So there'd be like a score every day.
[Guest]: So on tsunami story, it'll be 15, 6, 5.
[Guest]: So AP, Reuters, AFP.
[Guest]: Every day we used to see that score and feel good or bad, etc.
[Guest]: And then the super cyclone happened in Odisha.
[Guest]: And I was sent there and it, again, coming face to face with death, with destruction,
[Guest]: all these very, very powerful human emotions that I was experiencing very early on in my
[Guest]: career.
[Guest]: That shaped who I was going to be as a communicator.
[Guest]: And I was in Odisha for a few months, a couple of months at least, because that was the thing
[Guest]: with the agency people, you know, you go in first and you get out last.
[Guest]: Then the Kargil war happened.
[Guest]: So I think I got the dates wrong earlier.
[Guest]: So 95 is when I joined India Abroad and 99 is when I joined the Associated Press.
[Guest]: So the Kargil war happens and 98, sorry, 98 is when I joined, that's when the nuclear
[Guest]: test took place.
[Guest]: And the next year the Kargil war happens, I'm there, when I'm about to go, I get chicken
[Guest]: pox.
[Guest]: And I'm like really devastated because I badly wanted to go.
[Guest]: So my departure was delayed by about 15-20 days.
[Guest]: My colleague, Hema Shukla, who now lives in the US, she went and I sort of replaced her.
[Guest]: And again, life changing for the first time in a battlefield, so close, there are the
[Guest]: shelling happening.
[Guest]: You don't realize that you're so close to life and death situations.
[Guest]: And you see the army at work for the first time, understand sort of life from their point
[Guest]: of view.
[Guest]: All those assignments were a great training in life for me.
[Guest]: And as a person, a person who has, who developed great empathy because of those experiences.
[Guest]: And I covered Kashmir extensively.
[Guest]: I covered insurgency very extensively, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, the Northeast.
[Guest]: So I was able to now start seeing the world from the point of view of others.
[Guest]: And that's something that I have never let go of.
[Guest]: I can, you know, I remember interviewing this Pakistani Jaisal Mohamad terrorist who was
[Guest]: arrested for bombing something and someone had died.
[Guest]: And he was 25 years old, I remember.
[Guest]: And he was from Bahawalpur, the same town as Masood Azhar.
[Guest]: And I interviewed him for two hours.
[Guest]: And then I said, so I could, I could see the world from his point of view.
[Guest]: I could see why he did what he did.
[Guest]: I didn't agree with what he did, but I could see why he did it.
[Guest]: And I could see how he got there.
[Guest]: And I think since that time, I have managed to hold on to this, whatever few skills I
[Guest]: have, but this definitely skill I have is that I have a great sense of proportion.
[Guest]: I can not like something someone says, but still like that person.
[Guest]: And I can make that difference.
[Guest]: And that is often challenged on social media because, you know, like I recently tweeted,
[Guest]: I unfollowed or muted a lot of people because of what they were on social media.
[Guest]: But I like who they are in real life.
[Guest]: And I want to continue liking them as they are.
[Guest]: But when they come onto Twitter, they become other people.
[Guest]: So I don't want to engage with that version of them.
[Guest]: So I can, I think I'm able to make that difference.
[Guest]: And all this looking back and now trying to make sense of what I learned at that time
[Guest]: than the earlier phase, but I was able to look at the world from other points of view.
[Guest]: And that's a, that's a valuable lesson to learn, which is extremely handy in today's
[Guest]: time when we are so angry, so outraged, and we want to become outraged.
[Guest]: We seem to be looking for things to be outraged about all the time.
[Guest]: You know, yesterday my daughter, Vaidehi, who's five, so she often becomes upset for
[Guest]: no reason and she'll sit in a corner grumpy and I was telling my wife, she's getting upset
[Guest]: over nothing.
[Guest]: She should be on Twitter.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's how and I, as a journalist, I learned storytelling, I did the biggest
[Guest]: possible assignments.
[Guest]: For the AP, I was doing the, you know, the tsunami happened.
[Guest]: I was in the Andamans for a couple of months.
[Guest]: I covered earthquakes, floods, you know, all kinds of natural disasters, which meant that
[Guest]: I came face-to-face with a lot of human misery and human pain and resilience.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember when the tsunami happened and they were doing a survey of the Nicobari
[Guest]: tribe.
[Guest]: They were doing, you know, assessing loss for everybody and people had to list their
[Guest]: losses and people from the quote-unquote mainland listed, you know, we lost this house and this
[Guest]: radio and this TV and da-da-da and the Nicobaris listed, well, I lost three of my pigs and
[Guest]: two of my cows and that's all that mattered to them.
[Guest]: The homes didn't, the huts didn't, etc.
[Guest]: And also I realized that they don't have a word for orphan in their language because
[Guest]: nobody's orphan, the community takes over, the community takes care of them.
[Guest]: So there's no word for orphan in the Nicobaris language.
[Guest]: So it was, yeah, it was a fascinating time and I still love journalism.
[Guest]: I'm an old-fashioned journalist.
[Guest]: I miss being a reporter and I'm very, I mean, it's become a joke now in my office ki mujhe
[Guest]: reporting karna hai.
[Guest]: Sir, aap 5 saal se bol rahe ho.
[Guest]: So becoming an entrepreneur has, you know, come with huge sacrifices, but yeah, I want
[Guest]: to be a Gaon Connection reporter, not its founder.
[Guest]: I want to write stories for my show, not, you know, be the storyteller.
[Guest]: So yeah, I'm rambling, I think.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, that's what I kind of love about my show when I can get people to ramble.
[Amit Varma]: I remember when, you know, the tsunami happened, I traveled on the coast of Tamil Nadu around
[Amit Varma]: that time.
[Amit Varma]: And I was in fact, blogging regularly during that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the interesting things I remembered is, and it took a while to put
[Amit Varma]: the pieces together, is that as we would go along the coast to different villages, people
[Amit Varma]: showed us watches and clocks that had stopped when the waters came in, and they had stopped
[Amit Varma]: at different times.
[Amit Varma]: And you could actually make out through your journey, how the water came in just by the
[Amit Varma]: stop times on the clock.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of strikes me as, you know, I remember blogging about that.
[Amit Varma]: And today, just as I, you know, as you mentioned that you were there, it strikes me as just
[Amit Varma]: a kind of concrete thing that you would remember and put in your stories.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come to your storytelling later, which I'm a big fan of as well.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get there, I had, you know, a question, which is that, you know, young people today
[Amit Varma]: often take it for granted that look, we have the world at our fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: So I can go online and all of journalism is there, all of storytelling is there, kuch
[Amit Varma]: bhi music hai, like you said, back in the double deck days, it used to be so much hard
[Amit Varma]: work to get a mixtape made of something that it was almost an achievement.
[Amit Varma]: And today, everything is there at the fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that for people of our generation, you know, privileged as we
[Amit Varma]: were, but for people of our generation, still, the world was largely closed, there wasn't
[Amit Varma]: an internet.
[Amit Varma]: And a question that often strikes me is the question of how are we formed, like in terms
[Amit Varma]: of your journalistic values and aesthetics, like you pointed out, working at Reuters obviously
[Amit Varma]: helped because that sense of values, which is there at a top class organization is percolating
[Amit Varma]: down and you're continuing with it in India abroad, and of course, AP, but in a sense
[Amit Varma]: of storytelling, how does that sort of work out?
[Amit Varma]: Because I can kind of look back at my past and say that, okay, these are the kind of
[Amit Varma]: books that I liked growing up, and this is sort of what has shaped my aesthetic values
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, today, a kid growing up has the best of world cinema and the best of Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: And a kid in Bombay would also have the best of Tamil cinema and Malayalam cinema, which
[Amit Varma]: otherwise back in the day, there would be no access to even that.
[Amit Varma]: What was that sort of process like of forming your taste and coming to a sense of this is
[Amit Varma]: who I am, this is what I like, this is the kind of work I want to do.
[Guest]: One of my shortcomings is that I've not watched a lot of films, I have not read a lot of books.
[Guest]: But I've met a lot of people, and I often say this, that I don't have a lot of knowledge,
[Guest]: but I have a lot of experience.
[Guest]: And that comes from the experience of others and the ability to listen to them and live
[Guest]: their experience.
[Guest]: And if I was doing journalism in an Indian newspaper, I know that that kind of storytelling
[Guest]: would not have its place, the kind of long form that, you know, I would do on a regular
[Guest]: basis.
[Guest]: It was not a luxury, I would do it on a regular basis.
[Guest]: Because you were explaining your stories to an international audience.
[Guest]: And the point was that how would an ignorant American reader who didn't give a damn about
[Guest]: India, how would you get him or her interested?
[Guest]: Used to be what, you know, our bosses used to tell us.
[Guest]: And because I was at India abroad earlier, anyway, I was right.
[Guest]: So writing for the foreign audience might seem to some like you were dumbing down things
[Guest]: like you were saying the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, and things like that.
[Guest]: But to me, it was an opportunity to bring a lot of storytelling into my writing.
[Guest]: And I used to challenge myself because I didn't want to become predictable in the way I wrote
[Guest]: my intro, the way I wrote, I structured a story, was I becoming repetitive?
[Guest]: Was I becoming boring?
[Guest]: So it's like a challenge you throw at yourself, how can you, how do you open a story?
[Guest]: How do you find, you know, 10 different ways to open the same story?
[Guest]: And I used to love that.
[Guest]: Of course, being in an agency, often our bylines were not published.
[Guest]: It would just say AP, or when I was at India abroad in India, they were going to, as I
[Guest]: said, IANS, which was then India Abroad News Service, now Indo-Asian News Service.
[Guest]: So that some amount of anonymity was there.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you were not doing it for fame.
[Guest]: If I was, you know, today's journalism, and I say this so much, it's become like a cliche
[Guest]: to myself also, today, a lot of journalists seem to believe that they're not covering
[Guest]: the news, they are the news.
[Guest]: And I come from a time when the anonymity that we had gave us the humility that we had,
[Guest]: and which is extremely crucial.
[Guest]: You had to earn your byline, it was not a given.
[Guest]: If your subscriber in the US or Europe liked your story, like really good, they would retain
[Guest]: your byline or not.
[Guest]: And suddenly you would get this big bunch where your bylines would be in the Washington
[Guest]: Post or the Philadelphia Inquirer or, you know, some other paper.
[Guest]: And I find, you know, I think our generation was extremely uniquely placed.
[Guest]: And because we've, we've seen both the AD and the BC, we've seen the arrival of the
[Guest]: internet, for God's sake, you know, that's a path breaking moment in our lives.
[Guest]: But we've also seen what happened before that.
[Guest]: So we carry the right amount of nostalgia and the right amount of modernity among us,
[Guest]: which is a deadly combination.
[Guest]: Nobody else can match it.
[Guest]: Nobody who came before us or after us can match what we have.
[Guest]: It's a beautiful mix.
[Guest]: We are, you know, that test tube, which will never get these two chemicals together.
[Guest]: We've seen that television that opened with the creaking, you know, loud sound that wouldn't
[Guest]: shudder.
[Guest]: We've paid one rupee and one and a half rupee per song to get our, you know, cassettes filled
[Guest]: with the songs we love.
[Guest]: We have seen that time before air conditioners, before coolers, and been fine with it.
[Guest]: We've heard that ugly sound of dial-up, which would come at the end with this rough sound,
[Guest]: which was the most beautiful sound in the world, because we were connected to the internet
[Guest]: and would get you to our Yahoo mail or, you know, our Yahoo search or whatever.
[Guest]: And here we are in the world that is now already, you know, experiencing artificial intelligence
[Guest]: and virtual reality and augmented reality, who can match this life?
[Guest]: I would pay to be, you know, born between these two eras.
[Guest]: So it's, I think it's fascinating.
[Guest]: And I think that has come across in all my work, where I'm able to hold on to a lot of
[Guest]: nostalgia, to hold on, I know those people.
[Guest]: And in our stories, I think I'm able to keep alive those people in some way.
[Guest]: And a lot of people often ask me, and I also wonder, my youngest known listener is five
[Guest]: years old, like everyday listener.
[Guest]: And my oldest is like grandparents.
[Guest]: Why would a five-year-old or let alone a five-year-old, why would a 12-year-old, 13-year-old, 16-year-old
[Guest]: listen to our stories?
[Guest]: They don't relate to this world.
[Guest]: I was in Kasauli many years ago, and there was this rooftop restaurant.
[Guest]: The hotel was owned by my friend, so he used to push me to sing every evening.
[Guest]: And I was singing a song I had written,
[Guest]: Maine dil se kaha, dhund lana khushi, na samajh laya gham, toh yeh gham hi sahi, from the
[Guest]: film Rog.
[Guest]: And I saw this young boy, 18, 19 years old, who was singing along, and he came up to me
[Guest]: and said, Sir, main toh rohta hu yeh gaana sunke, Sir aap mil gaye, mera matlab it's
[Guest]: biggest moment.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking, why does this guy relate to it?
[Guest]: He was not even born, I think, or must have been very young when the song was written.
[Guest]: And the answer is as follows.
[Guest]: The answer is that, as a communicator, if our work has universal emotions, we can never
[Guest]: fail.
[Guest]: And it's a science I have learned during the course of my journey, when I have narrated
[Guest]: stories and I've had people from Kashmir call in, from Sopore, from Kupwara, from Northeast,
[Guest]: from where, in the case of Kashmir, you know, they would not like the idea of India.
[Guest]: But in the night, they would hear stories from this guy who's rooting and setting his
[Guest]: stories in that very idea, right, that very geography, that very place, and crying with
[Guest]: those stories, and why, because there is a universal emotion there.
[Guest]: The father-son emotion, the feeling of loss, the words that we talk about.
[Guest]: Or when I get a call from a listener in Guwahati who very sweetly says, a male listener who
[Guest]: says, main aapki kahaniya roz sunti hu, why does he say that?
[Guest]: Why does he relate to these stories?
[Guest]: Or people in the southern part of the country, or different age groups, or different people
[Guest]: from different social strata.
[Guest]: So when I started this journey, I had no Excel sheet in front of me.
[Guest]: I had no plan in front of me.
[Guest]: I didn't know any kind of stories that I wanted to narrate.
[Guest]: But I was just, in the first season, I wrote all the stories and I was just, it was my
[Guest]: stories from my growing up years, my small town, Nainital, Lucknow, they were set in
[Guest]: this imaginary city of Yad Shehar, but they were actually, everything had either happened
[Guest]: with me or around me, or I had seen that.
[Guest]: And I found that, I might be digressing in this answer, but I found that I had scraped
[Guest]: somewhere the urban dust of the average listener.
[Guest]: In a country with some of the oldest and richest storytelling traditions of the world, we had
[Guest]: forgotten them.
[Guest]: And I have these two imaginary milestones in my head about how did storytelling die,
[Guest]: or rather the simple act of parents and grandparents narrating stories to their children.
[Guest]: First, the cable TV arrived.
[Guest]: Until that point, Doordarshan kind of held the integrity compass when it came to content.
[Guest]: Whatever else you might call it, it believed in good content.
[Guest]: But that became a level playing field in a bad way, in my view, when cable TV arrived.
[Guest]: Because suddenly now it was all about winning the audiences.
[Guest]: So different kind of content was there, but it had huge takers.
[Guest]: So suddenly when your 9pm programming, 10pm programming started, that simple act of narrating
[Guest]: stories to your children went out of the window.
[Guest]: Economic liberalization or the economic reforms when they happened, and I sometimes draw the
[Guest]: direct linkage between the economic reforms and storytelling might seem odd.
[Guest]: But suddenly the father or the mother who used to come home at 5.30 was now coming home
[Guest]: at 9.30.
[Guest]: Because privatization brought different work cultures, different working hours.
[Guest]: The whole definition of 9 to 5 was changing.
[Guest]: And so the time spent with the family, where storytelling was a very strong bond within
[Guest]: families, that changed.
[Guest]: Even grandparents became busy.
[Guest]: And then of course, the arrival of the mobile phones, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So when we started storytelling, it was nothing new.
[Guest]: We were just scraping the dust off the urban existence of people.
[Guest]: And a lot of people realized that this is the world that they left behind.
[Guest]: This is the world that they miss, but they might not have heard that voice in so many
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: Also, nostalgia had not been creatively captured until then.
[Guest]: The only reference before that to nostalgia was Ali Haider's song, Purani Jeans.
[Guest]: And after that, nothing really had happened.
[Guest]: I remember writing a piece in Brunch, which kind of started this entire journey.
[Guest]: I was working at Hindustan Times, I was the deputy executive editor.
[Guest]: And I was doing a story, a series called Mission Kashmir, where I was traveling with a Kashmiri
[Guest]: Muslim and a Kashmiri Pandit colleague.
[Guest]: And we used to sort of look for stories in remote Kashmir as we journeyed.
[Guest]: And Poonam Saxena was then the editor of Brunch and said, if you're going to write a cover
[Guest]: story for Brunch, then write it on 50 years of Doordarshan.
[Guest]: And I wrote this story, which I realized was my own story as I started.
[Guest]: I started writing it reluctantly, but then I realized it was me.
[Guest]: It had my grandmother who was coming with guavas and salt and that little different
[Guest]: kind of a salt called Buknu sprinkled on it.
[Guest]: I remember that it was about that wooden case of the TV and India versus West Indies cricket
[Guest]: matches and Srikanth and Malcolm Marshall and, you know, that era.
[Guest]: And the response to that one piece told me that it had touched some raw nerve, which
[Guest]: I didn't even know existed.
[Guest]: And that then led to me sort of creating this, a music company had approached me, and then
[Guest]: we did a music, we created a band called Bandcall 9.
[Guest]: And then we did this album called Rewind.
[Guest]: And then when we wanted a radio partner for that, it became a radio show.
[Guest]: And everything then came together again, the journalism, the nostalgia, the small town
[Guest]: sort of experiences, all of it was coming together.
[Guest]: And because I was straddling these two worlds, I was able to remain content.
[Guest]: It was, I think it was a new take on nostalgia because it was contemporary at one level,
[Guest]: but it had roots and it, in that sense, it defined how we are, you know, millions of
[Guest]: us urban Indians, who we are, you know, that when a puja is happening at our home, we do
[Guest]: think of whether we can look for that kurta pajama, you know, kept somewhere away, which
[Guest]: we would otherwise, you know, might not wear and opt for denim jeans.
[Guest]: That's who we are.
[Guest]: So the contemporary and our roots, they walk side by side, they exist side by side.
[Guest]: And I also realized that audiences also have a split personality, young people.
[Guest]: I suddenly realized that when I started storytelling, I started it, of course, not because I wanted
[Guest]: to, but because I wanted to sell the CDs of my album and promote it and etc.
[Guest]: I'd done just a three month contract with Big FM to do it, and I thought I'd do it and
[Guest]: I'm out of it.
[Guest]: My album would work.
[Guest]: But at that point also, I thought that I was, my audience was 30, 35 and above.
[Guest]: People who would have some nostalgia.
[Guest]: And I suddenly realized that there were 12 year olds, 13 year olds, 16 year olds who
[Guest]: were loving these stories.
[Guest]: And I, that's when I realized that it's we the communicators who stereotype our audiences.
[Guest]: It's we who say that, oh, this is a 13 year old audience.
[Guest]: Well, oh, they'll be dumb.
[Guest]: No, it's we who are dumb.
[Guest]: We don't work hard for our audiences.
[Guest]: We don't create good content that they would like.
[Guest]: It's not that they don't like this stuff.
[Guest]: We didn't work hard enough for them to like our stuff.
[Guest]: And so there have been great learnings as a communicator in this entire road that I
[Guest]: have traveled.
[Guest]: I feel this, and I quite mean it when I say that I've become a better person in narrating
[Guest]: stories because once again, that thing I started with my journalism, every day I become the
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: Every day I become someone else.
[Guest]: And in doing so, I'm able to see the world from someone else's point of view.
[Guest]: It might be an unpopular person.
[Guest]: It might be an angry person.
[Guest]: It might be a woman, it might be a little child.
[Guest]: And that helps me in my real life also look at everybody from and look at the world from
[Guest]: their point of view.
[Amit Varma]: So a number of strands, I mean, one, of course, is very resonant to me when you talk about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, us sort of being that bridge generation, which is kind of rooted to the past and nostalgic
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: But also there is brave new world we've entered.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, I'm, you know, it's almost become a cliche to my listeners, how I keep saying
[Amit Varma]: people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And what social media often tends to do is become very reductive that you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you choose your ideological tribe, and you are in your echo chamber, and then you're
[Amit Varma]: sort of trying to raise your status within it.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, don't get me started on social media.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a thought that kind of has been with me for a few weeks.
[Amit Varma]: I recently, so I teach this writing course where I talk about how we should always look
[Amit Varma]: for the concrete and favor the concrete over the abstract, because that is what makes things
[Amit Varma]: relatable.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra recently, she did that great book on, you know, memories
[Amit Varma]: of partition, where again, she's exploring concrete objects.
[Amit Varma]: And through that, what you find is that, you know, when you get to that intimate level
[Amit Varma]: of a particular object, you see the good side of people.
[Amit Varma]: But when you get to larger abstractions, you know, like nationalism, or like religion and
[Amit Varma]: all of those, and it's those abstractions that can sometimes tear you apart.
[Amit Varma]: And like one observation of mine, obviously, is that what seems to have happened though
[Amit Varma]: I will hold that cable television and liberalization are a big net benefit.
[Amit Varma]: But I understand your point exactly that what seems to have happened is that they allow
[Amit Varma]: abstraction to scale, and therefore they subdue the concrete by giving it less time.
[Amit Varma]: So instead of, you know, a father sitting with his daughter and telling her a story
[Amit Varma]: at 8pm, you have the father coming home late and you have these toxic narratives of whatever
[Amit Varma]: is happening on news TV dominating.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I love about your storytelling is how you privilege the contract
[Amit Varma]: like the concrete, like there's a story called Saregama Pa, which you, you know, wrote in
[Amit Varma]: your first season, which, you know, towards the beginning has this girl who loves music
[Amit Varma]: and she's gotten married and she's entering her marital home.
[Amit Varma]: And she overhears a new husband telling the servant, you know, harmonium store, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and she's passionate about music.
[Amit Varma]: That's a big passion.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly that kind of brings home and that whole shift is so beautifully communicated
[Amit Varma]: by that concrete object.
[Amit Varma]: And in one of your other conversations, you know, you spoke about how so many people got
[Amit Varma]: in touch with you after that and said,
[Guest]: Yeah, it was really amazing.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is, is that, you know, this sort of guideline that I, for example, tell
[Amit Varma]: my writing students that privilege the concrete or whatever this golden rule of storytelling
[Amit Varma]: almost is something that completely comes to life in your work.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when you are getting drawn to storytelling, and you've already spoken about how that like,
[Amit Varma]: I was actually going to ask you a question about your transition from journalism to radio.
[Amit Varma]: And while you were speaking, I realized that it's not really a transition that you're storytelling,
[Amit Varma]: you've just kind of moved from form to the other.
[Amit Varma]: But my question now here is that, you know, we will read all these books of writing advice,
[Amit Varma]: and some people will do courses like mine, and there will be all these guidelines.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people who want to write for films will buy Robert McKee story or all these Sitfield
[Amit Varma]: books or a three act structure.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great book by Christopher Booker called The Seven Basic Plots, which is keep
[Amit Varma]: Sati Kahaniya, everything is a version on those.
[Amit Varma]: Now, as you are discovering the craft of storytelling, and the other thing that I wanted to ask you
[Amit Varma]: about, which is related, is that you've done something extraordinary in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you've not only told your own stories, but you've taken the stories of others and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, made them come to life while the conventional understanding and my understanding also, I
[Amit Varma]: must confess, would be that not everybody can be a great storyteller.
[Amit Varma]: But what you seem to have done is almost democratized that and told stories of many others and
[Amit Varma]: given form to them.
[Amit Varma]: So give me some of your sort of insights about the craft of storytelling and how your understanding
[Amit Varma]: of the craft of storytelling evolved in this time.
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there a structure and so often what can happen is a convention can become a formula.
[Amit Varma]: So from something positive, it can become a negative.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think in terms of structure, what are the important facets of storytelling that
[Amit Varma]: you consider?
[Guest]: How do you approach the art of storytelling?
[Guest]: So like I said, in the beginning, my biggest strength in my view is that I have no baggage
[Guest]: of convention.
[Guest]: I have no, I don't know how something should be done.
[Guest]: So I cook up some way of doing that.
[Guest]: I didn't know how to start a band or start a rural media company or do on camera interviews.
[Guest]: I'd never done video.
[Guest]: So when radio started and it started again, I was asked by the CEO, Tarun Katyal, who
[Guest]: now heads Zee5, and I said, you know, I don't think I can do radio.
[Guest]: I said, okay, I was bluffing my way, actually, because before this, what had happened was
[Guest]: that when we formed the band, Amit Khanna was then the chairman of Reliance Entertainment.
[Guest]: He called me and long story short, I mean, he set up album.
[Guest]: So I realized that piracy had killed this whole business.
[Guest]: And they said, you do live shows and earn money from it, and then you pay us our advance
[Guest]: back and etc.
[Guest]: And I mean, I had never remotely been connected with anything like a band.
[Guest]: I don't even actually understand English music, one of my big regrets, because I don't understand
[Guest]: the accent.
[Guest]: People laugh at it, but I don't understand it.
[Guest]: So when we formed this band with a few friends who were musicians, etc.
[Guest]: And I said, let's create a storytelling band.
[Guest]: I said, okay, how will that work?
[Guest]: Because I have a fetish for like new ideas.
[Guest]: I was just bluffing my way.
[Guest]: I said, okay, well, the storyteller will start the story and he'll go off stage.
[Guest]: A song will start, which is written by the same writer.
[Guest]: And then he'll come back and continue the story and that said, well, this can't work.
[Guest]: And then I sort of convinced them, we debuted at the Kalagoda festival.
[Guest]: And just like I had kind of remained, tried to remain relevant in a band as a writer,
[Guest]: because they said, you know, I said, let's form a writer led band, I said, what will
[Guest]: a writer do on stage?
[Guest]: And in that instant moment, that was truly a life changing moment, because I said that
[Guest]: out of nowhere, I said, well, the writer will tell a story.
[Guest]: And all I was doing was I wanted to not be the non-playing captain to sit there and watch.
[Guest]: That was all I wanted to remain relevant.
[Guest]: And that had led me to this moment when I was being offered a radio show.
[Guest]: And only to remain relevant, I said, let's do storytelling.
[Guest]: So I went back and I wrote a story and the story was called Diwali Ki Raat.
[Guest]: It was my first story.
[Guest]: It's extremely simple.
[Guest]: And until then, I had never written a Hindi story in my life.
[Guest]: I had just written one story in English, which was an awful story in my childhood.
[Guest]: That was it.
[Guest]: In a real sense, I had never even written a story in my life.
[Guest]: So forget craft or anything like that.
[Guest]: I didn't know how to structure it.
[Guest]: It was a simple story about a man who cannot go home for Diwali.
[Guest]: And I think this thing that I talk about, the universal emotion, a lot of people related
[Guest]: to it, because whichever faith you follow, not going home, not being able to go home
[Guest]: for your festival is a very common thing.
[Guest]: And when they okayed the show, I barely had one or two stories ready.
[Guest]: And suddenly I was riding a tiger because it was a daily show.
[Guest]: So I would write all night and I would record in the morning and then have lunch at the
[Guest]: big FM office and then go back and start writing again.
[Guest]: It was like the toughest and most creatively satisfying three months of my life.
[Guest]: I was writing a new plot every day, new characters, not even writing like a whole series.
[Guest]: And that's when I started to think very differently.
[Guest]: So I would go to, like, I'm sitting here, there's an armchair next to me in my study
[Guest]: and I would think that, okay, what if this armchair was telling its story?
[Guest]: How many people must have sat on it or how many things it must have heard, how many secrets
[Guest]: it must have heard.
[Guest]: Once I wrote a story, a Chavani's Atmakatha, when they were phasing out the 25 paisa coin,
[Guest]: that Chavani is telling her Atmakatha.
[Guest]: So I started, again, this whole thing of seeing the world from other people's point of view.
[Guest]: I was kind of extending that to often seeing it from inanimate objects point of view.
[Guest]: And there was a story on this old postman who was about to retire and his son wants
[Guest]: to move away and he, like, resents it and the wife explains and the grandson says,
[Guest]: Baba, aapka time gaya, email karna, email ka time aagaya, koi postman hai.
[Guest]: But I was, I think I was learning as I was writing and there was no other storytelling
[Guest]: show to be afraid of or to compare it against.
[Guest]: So I had no, nothing holding me back.
[Guest]: I had the creative control.
[Guest]: So slowly, I think what emerged was, I mean, in the first season, again, I mean, there
[Guest]: was no craft I followed.
[Guest]: There was no rule I followed because I knew no rules.
[Guest]: But what happened after that was that a lot of young people tried to come to me, ki hum
[Guest]: likhna chahate hain kahaniya.
[Guest]: And I said, look, main kahaniya kharidne ke dhande mein nahin hoon, main teacher ka beta
[Guest]: hoon, toh saath baith ke kar sakte hain, thoda aapse seekhunga, thoda main aapko seekhaunga.
[Guest]: So when season one was over, none of that was on my mind.
[Guest]: When season two started, between that, there was a gap.
[Guest]: And some young people started coming to my home in Bombay.
[Guest]: And because I had called them on Monday at 11 o'clock, every Monday I used to call them
[Guest]: at 11.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, I have a thing for naming and branding things and stuff.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, let's call this something.
[Guest]: I think it looks like this will become something big.
[Guest]: I said, after the first two meetings, I said, let's call it the Monday Mundli.
[Guest]: And then the Monday went off and it became just the Mundli.
[Guest]: Now, how do you create a form?
[Guest]: I didn't know how to teach writing or anything.
[Guest]: And the structure of my small living room was such that there were two sofas on opposite
[Guest]: sides.
[Guest]: So they would all sit there.
[Guest]: You know, before I knew it, there were like 10, 12 people coming, all these aspirants.
[Guest]: And I used to sit on the same rocking chair, like this old grandfather.
[Guest]: And so one person would narrate a story and then I would, for the first few times, I would
[Guest]: say to her, what did you think of it?
[Guest]: And we would go around the room when everybody used to say what they thought of the story.
[Guest]: And slowly, a form was emerging, a process was emerging.
[Guest]: Until then, there was no process.
[Guest]: Now they couldn't, I said, you can't say I liked it.
[Guest]: If you liked it, why did you like it?
[Guest]: If you didn't like it, why did you not like it?
[Guest]: So in the beginning, it was me who was doing most of the talking because I spoke in the
[Guest]: end.
[Guest]: And slowly as we went by, I realized that I was doing the least talking because they
[Guest]: had said what I wanted to, which was delightful because their craft of appreciating or not
[Guest]: liking a story.
[Guest]: And then, you know, I was also now analyzing stories.
[Guest]: What about this protagonist?
[Guest]: And slowly we evolved a science to it.
[Guest]: So it's a six-segment story on radio.
[Guest]: The first segment kind of introduces the protagonist and something of the plot, the premise, the
[Guest]: one-liner.
[Guest]: The second takes that forward and around the third, the conflict sets in and you know,
[Guest]: so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Then we started enjoying that process.
[Guest]: So I did, for example, I did something called Kahani Ek Ending Paanch.
[Guest]: So I did five stories and I said, I'll write the first one.
[Guest]: So the story was, it would start with one moment and you had to write five separate
[Guest]: stories with the same names of the character and five completely different stories, not
[Guest]: even endings.
[Guest]: So the story was that there was a park and in a corner of the park was a bench, there
[Guest]: was a woman sitting, she was sitting seriously and there was a guy looking for something
[Guest]: in the grass.
[Guest]: That was the moment.
[Guest]: Who are they?
[Guest]: What's their relationship?
[Guest]: Are they strangers?
[Guest]: Do they know each other?
[Guest]: What's he looking for in the grass?
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: So that evolved.
[Guest]: Then I used to say, okay, move the camera.
[Guest]: The story is told from one person's point of view, move it to that subsidiary character's
[Guest]: point of view, the POV changes.
[Guest]: What does the story look like now?
[Guest]: But most of all, what is a story?
[Guest]: A story is a journey that takes the listener from a certain place, through a certain place,
[Guest]: to a certain place.
[Guest]: So a letter could also be a story, a page written in a diary could also be a story,
[Guest]: as long as the listener has traveled somewhere between the beginning of the story and the
[Guest]: end of it.
[Guest]: So we started experimenting, we started doing concepts like, I will give you the title of
[Guest]: a story and you will write it.
[Guest]: And today the titles will be around colors.
[Guest]: The story is Lal.
[Guest]: This week I'll give you stories around different times of the day.
[Guest]: So your story is Dhai Baje, that's the title.
[Guest]: Your story is Subah Saath Baje.
[Guest]: So I think we were having fun, it was like a laboratory and we were evolving.
[Guest]: I now regret, I should have recorded a lot of, you know, because I speak passionately
[Guest]: at these mandalis and I often say the same things and etc.
[Guest]: But slowly I think the craft emerged that yes, there was some kind of a science behind
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I was also extremely mindful that as we got along, as we, you know, down the show, that
[Guest]: we'd never wanted to stereotype or objectify people on the basis of their color of skin
[Guest]: or weight or which part of the country they came from, or the usual shortcuts that communicators
[Guest]: use on radio or TV.
[Guest]: I was also, I didn't want my listener to feel defeated at the end.
[Guest]: There was one story I had done.
[Guest]: So there was one story called Meri Pyari Ex-Patni, Aur Uske Agale Din Thi Meri Pyari Ex-Husband.
[Guest]: So Meri Pyari Ex-Husband mein jo wife hai, she is a very evil character who, you know,
[Guest]: really destroys, deceives this guy.
[Guest]: And a lot of the listeners wrote in, that's the only story they wrote in.
[Guest]: They said, sorry, we didn't like this story because this was an ugly character and there
[Guest]: should be no ugly characters in Yad Sheher because this is our catharsis, this is our
[Guest]: de-stressing time.
[Guest]: So there are negative characters, there are, you know, characters you don't like, but you
[Guest]: can't have a character who's out to destroy someone and there's no arc, there's no redemption,
[Guest]: there's nothing, the bad person gets away.
[Guest]: So those were some of the things that I, like, I'm not doing, these are not documenting
[Guest]: times or they will, I'm very mindful of the impact of whatever I do, whether it's storytelling,
[Guest]: whether it's journalism, the impact is hugely important to me.
[Guest]: And that impact should be either through journalism, you solve problems, there's a hospital that
[Guest]: has shut down, you get it started, there's some injustice being done, you know, you point
[Guest]: it out.
[Guest]: Through storytelling, a lot of people have told us that their depression was healed.
[Guest]: And people of different age groups, students have said it from quota, young adults have
[Guest]: said it, young couples have said it, older people, you know, grandparents have said it.
[Guest]: So all kinds of people have said their depression was healed.
[Guest]: That really, that, I mean, is so exciting.
[Guest]: What can be more exciting as a communicator?
[Guest]: A lot of young people have said they got better grades because of our stories.
[Guest]: So people in, again, students, they say that because we didn't feel the stress.
[Guest]: People have said we are able to do math better because while we're doing math, we are, your
[Guest]: story's playing.
[Guest]: And I can never understand that, but I've heard it so often that I'm curious to find
[Guest]: out the link.
[Guest]: So the impact is, so, you know, you could say that these stories are far removed from
[Guest]: reality, that nobody, not nobody, but the good people don't lose in them, you could
[Guest]: say that.
[Guest]: But at one level, they are about reality and they are about how we think the world should
[Guest]: be.
[Guest]: I mean, an interpretation of living with differences, with living with our shortcomings, with coming
[Guest]: to terms with our past, our present, and things like that.
[Guest]: So, but the one thing that kind of saddens me is that the literary world does not see
[Guest]: my work as literature.
[Guest]: They look down upon it.
[Guest]: They look, I think they look at it just like, you know, that this is entertainment.
[Guest]: When we were writing stories, whenever we write the brief in the monthly is that you're
[Guest]: not writing for radio, you're writing literature, but because it's on a mass medium, because
[Guest]: it's not in the form of a book, because it did not first appear in the form of a book,
[Guest]: and that upsets me.
[Guest]: That is classist.
[Guest]: That upsets me.
[Guest]: Other than that, I think I'm extremely happy that our stories have had an impact that many
[Guest]: of the forms of communication might not have had.
[Guest]: I often tell our monthly writers that you are, what you're doing is far more powerful
[Guest]: than some of the biggest singers, some of the biggest artists, some of the biggest actors,
[Guest]: because what you're doing makes people make their life choices.
[Guest]: We've had so many people writing in, hundreds and hundreds saying that we repaired our marriage
[Guest]: because we heard such and such story.
[Guest]: My family was breaking apart.
[Guest]: My mother and my wife were not getting along, and then we heard this story, and we wept,
[Guest]: and they wept, and we became fine.
[Guest]: Or I was in a bad relationship, and I realized that, and I got the courage to break up with
[Guest]: my boyfriend or my husband because of certain story.
[Guest]: I mean, imagine that power.
[Guest]: That is the power that our stories have had on our audiences.
[Guest]: And people write to us in the most personal of ways, I mean, what other form of communication
[Guest]: would have this?
[Guest]: So it's a great act of responsibility also that has to come with it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll make a bunch of sort of speculative points here.
[Amit Varma]: One, as far as all these people tell you that, you know, it helps them do math, if your story
[Amit Varma]: is the one in the background, that would simply be because of your very soothing voice.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I am working on something, I'll also put on some soothing instrumental music
[Amit Varma]: generally, but something that doesn't really interfere with me.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe that's a function of your voice.
[Amit Varma]: But getting sort of more serious, I think, one, I mean, there are, of course, many reasons
[Amit Varma]: behind the snobbishness of the literary thoughts and where that could be coming from.
[Amit Varma]: But one interesting sort of distinction, and I'm just thinking aloud, is that whereas that
[Amit Varma]: kind of literary writing sets out to reflect the human condition, what you try to do in
[Amit Varma]: your storytelling is also address the human condition, in the sense that people crave
[Amit Varma]: stories for whatever reasons, and you fulfill a certain kind of narrative craving within
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, again, thinking aloud, and I don't know if you would have any thoughts on this.
[Amit Varma]: But what we see increasingly in modern times is that, you know, we know that people explain
[Amit Varma]: the world to themselves through stories.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also a craving for a certain kind of story, which often baffles me whether
[Amit Varma]: it's sort of QAnon movement in the US of conspiracy theories, or whether it's what happened here
[Amit Varma]: recently in Mumbai after, you know, SSR died, and there were all these conspiracy theories
[Amit Varma]: that actually, he invented 4G, and that's why they got rid of him, or he had a cure
[Amit Varma]: for COVID.
[Amit Varma]: So that's why they got rid of him.
[Amit Varma]: And all these.
[Unknown]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So there was he had a patent for COVID and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why they bumped him off.
[Amit Varma]: There was another story which had Akshay Kumar as a villain, because apparently, SSR had
[Amit Varma]: invented 4G.
[Amit Varma]: And these were all happening on Twitter and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd come across them and take screenshots, because what if they disappear, but they're
[Amit Varma]: just all over, you can find them.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of, so it's not just the stuff that is on news television, the toxic stuff
[Amit Varma]: of murder and drugs and all that.
[Amit Varma]: There are also these completely wild angles, which become viral, because people want to
[Amit Varma]: believe the more outrageous it is, it seems people want to believe now I can understand
[Amit Varma]: that people find your sort of stories soothing and meaningful, because one they provide a
[Amit Varma]: sort of comfort and tradition and all of that too, they make you see the world through the
[Amit Varma]: eyes of the other, like you've pointed out about how, you know, a story by your daughter
[Amit Varma]: can be so meaningful to you, because through her eyes, you realize how tall the table is,
[Amit Varma]: or how high your door is.
[Amit Varma]: And I can see why that can actually change people with the way they look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, do you have any speculations on why there is this deep desire for all these
[Amit Varma]: bizarre kinds of stories as well, like we've seen recently?
[Guest]: I think it is a titillation of sorts that we want, you know, what happened to Sebastian
[Guest]: Bosch?
[Guest]: We don't know, right?
[Guest]: But a part of us wants to believe that he's alive, that he was alive to a certain point
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: So I think this side of us that does not want closure on certain things, things that might
[Guest]: be dear to us, like with Sebastian Bosch, like with Sushant Singh Rajput, or things
[Guest]: that had a packed explanation, that doesn't satisfy us.
[Guest]: Also, we have been fed with so much by way of research for conspiracies.
[Guest]: Now you have OTT shows that actually teach you how to kill, right?
[Guest]: And you know, you have a Ustra, here's the part of the neck where you hit and here's
[Guest]: how the blood comes out.
[Guest]: You can watch it.
[Guest]: So before OTT, I mean, so I might seem like a very old fashioned person when it comes
[Guest]: to communication.
[Guest]: But I realized that my views have been very, very consistent.
[Guest]: There was once a celebrated Hindi author on the TV show with me.
[Guest]: This was after that song came out, DK Bose.
[Guest]: And they put me on TV and I said, like, what nonsense is this?
[Guest]: What about, why can't good lyrics be written, was my point of view.
[Guest]: And he said, he's no more.
[Guest]: He said,
[Guest]: And he said, we are showing the reality.
[Guest]: I said, if you're showing the reality, well, there are many other realities, you know,
[Guest]: which might be even more gory, the act of going to the latrine every day.
[Guest]: Why don't you show that?
[Guest]: If this is not reality, this is titillation.
[Guest]: And that is the tussle.
[Guest]: What is the purpose of communication?
[Guest]: And what is the purpose of a communicator?
[Guest]: If it is to solve problems, for sure, show the grisly, gory reality, which is what journalism
[Guest]: does.
[Guest]: But if the purpose is to show the unseeable, or what was earlier seen as unseeable, I mean,
[Guest]: at that point, what I said, there was no OTT then, but I said, when you have these songs
[Guest]: with lyrics like these, with lyrics that objectify women,
[Guest]: when you're doing that, and the same song is playing at the school reception, at the
[Guest]: hospital reception, on mass media TV, I mean, what are you doing?
[Guest]: Are you realising the impact of it?
[Guest]: Are you able to limit children or young adults from watching it?
[Guest]: No, you're not.
[Guest]: But in the name of the freedom of expression, you're not realising the impact that you're...
[Guest]: Most communicators do not realise their power, or if they do, they don't give a damn.
[Guest]: And that includes journalists.
[Guest]: That includes writers.
[Guest]: When a journalist stands and holds a mic and says,
[Guest]: Teen aatankwadi shayar mein ghusaye hain.
[Guest]: You know what that does?
[Guest]: That what that does is that someone will not send their daughter to their friend's birthday
[Guest]: at the McDonald's because they said it on TV.
[Guest]: So that journalist, that reporter, for him or her, it's just a news bulletin and it's
[Guest]: over.
[Guest]: They don't know their power.
[Guest]: And if they know their power, because now a lot of them do, they are very powerful,
[Guest]: then they're not using that power responsibly.
[Guest]: And the same is for lyric writers, is the same for film producers.
[Guest]: And I seem like, you know, I seem so old-fashioned and like apna yeh dhol bajate rehte hain ki
[Guest]: responsibility hone che communicators ki.
[Guest]: But I strongly believe that.
[Guest]: I strongly believe that, you know, with the explosion of content in our face today, I'm
[Guest]: so scared of what my daughter watches, because the algorithm of the YouTube, she might start
[Guest]: with a nursery rhyme or Peppa Pig and might land up God knows where.
[Guest]: And I have no control over that, right?
[Guest]: So that bothers me.
[Guest]: These days, as you know, I'm infuriated against this whole white hat junior business, right?
[Guest]: It's not about a company.
[Guest]: It's not about, it's about the fact that, it's about the audacity that you've crossed
[Guest]: one more Lakshman Rekha, you've crossed many Lakshman Rekhas.
[Guest]: When the chocolate industry came, when the diamond industry was invented out of nowhere,
[Guest]: it was, you know, this FOMO, fear of missing out.
[Guest]: This whole IIT and medical thing that you and I have, we lived through that era.
[Guest]: If we were not clearing those exams, but childhood for the education space, a sacred space, however
[Guest]: sold out it might be, I mean, that's where I draw the line.
[Guest]: And as a father of a five-year-old, I will not take this and I will speak out and which
[Guest]: I have been doing.
[Guest]: So the responsibility, so for example, you know, I might go as a founder of a company
[Guest]: with a business idea, that is a great story.
[Guest]: And I might get some $50 million of investment today, will the investor or investors look
[Guest]: at the social impact or the, you have fantasy cricket apps today, you're gambling, you're
[Guest]: legitimising gambling and you're encouraging people, not just encouraging, nudging them,
[Guest]: you're putting, you know, campaigns of tens of millions of dollars behind them so that
[Guest]: people, young people go and gamble.
[Guest]: Do you even know what that will do?
[Guest]: Is there no sense of responsibility for that universe or is, because your heroes in that
[Guest]: investing business are the people, the blue-eyed boys, because they're, and they're mostly
[Guest]: boys are, you know, the flavour of the season, who's got this investment of a hundred million,
[Guest]: 200 million, 1 billion, that's it, what they're doing, what is the impact of that, nobody
[Guest]: gives a damn.
[Guest]: That's why my Twitter bio, the first line reads, decency is my business model.
[Guest]: And through everything, I will stand for that, that through whether, you know, so we're doing
[Guest]: the slow movement now, which includes slow content, slow products, so-and-so experiences.
[Guest]: We're selling slow cookies also, but there is an honesty in it that I'm standing for
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: There's no, this will not be lying on a label like you hear all the time.
[Guest]: If our venture is selling honey, I guarantee you that it's pure.
[Guest]: So it should reflect that honesty.
[Guest]: And that's what bothers me that everything cannot be up for sale.
[Guest]: If you are a content creator, you have a huge power.
[Guest]: If I was the head of one of these big TV networks, imagine the power I would wield and I would
[Guest]: say, hey, let's do something that ends female infanticide, because I know I have that power
[Guest]: through content.
[Guest]: If my, you know, tiny little effort on radio can have people say that they were healed
[Guest]: of depression, well, imagine if I had a gazillion times more eyeballs.
[Guest]: So that bothers me.
[Guest]: And I think that's a conversation which is uncomfortable.
[Guest]: I might seem like that angry fufa in a wedding, jo kone mein rahte hain aur humesha gussa
[Guest]: ho jate hain.
[Guest]: But yes, I am that angry fufa who is bothered by a lot of things.
[Guest]: And in the middle of all that, I don't want to be perpetually upset, perpetually angry,
[Guest]: perpetually outraged.
[Guest]: Because if I'm outraged all the time on social media, it draws me away from the other things
[Guest]: I do, which have a positive effect, which have a good effect.
[Guest]: So those things sap my mind.
[Guest]: If someone abuses you on Twitter, it affects my day, it ruins my day.
[Guest]: Some unknown person who never gives a damn, who abused you and went on to the next person
[Guest]: to abuse, but you feel so defeated.
[Guest]: Yeh kaun hai yaar, isne aisa kaise keh diya, yeh mere saamne hota, iski aankhon mein aankhe
[Guest]: dalke mein kehta, ki tu soch bhi rahe hai, tu kya bol raha hai bhai.
[Amit Varma]: Agar wo aapke saamne hota toh bolta hi nahi, but have you heard of the Ashish Nehra approach
[Amit Varma]: to internet trolling?
[Amit Varma]: No, what is that?
[Amit Varma]: So Ashish Nehra was once in some kind of controversy and he was getting madly trolled on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: and people abusing him and all.
[Amit Varma]: So three days after it started, a reporter went to him and said ki Nehra ji yeh sab trolling
[Amit Varma]: ho raha hai, what is your reaction?
[Amit Varma]: So Nehra is like, what trolling and then he takes out his phone and shows him and it's
[Amit Varma]: one of those Nokia push button phones.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, if you don't allow yourself to be trolled, they can't troll you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what they're going to stand outside your house and throw emojis at you or something.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, there is so much more to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and then we'll head off speed towards the end.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself.
[Amit Varma]: Scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of The Scene and The Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Nilesh Mishra who just described himself with one of my favorite words in the
[Amit Varma]: Hindi language.
[Amit Varma]: He said he is the angry foofa, which is such a delightful word.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one of the other before we I also want to move on to the art of conversation
[Amit Varma]: and chat about that, because again, that's something at which was such a master.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go into that, a broader question that I had earlier, that you know, you've
[Amit Varma]: come from a slightly different background from somebody who's been a journalist for
[Amit Varma]: Reuters and AP and all of that in the sense that you've grown up in these small towns,
[Amit Varma]: which are also different from each other, as you pointed out, and you've been multilingual
[Amit Varma]: in the sense ki kaafi journalists whom I see around me are, you know, English, English,
[Amit Varma]: English, everything is English.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I used to read Hindi once upon a time, but now I don't know if I'll be able
[Amit Varma]: to read a book in Hindi, for example.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, it's sort of been an even influence.
[Amit Varma]: And does that also shape the sort of person you are that sort of being easily multilingual?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, does it shape the way you look at the world?
[Amit Varma]: And does it then also shape the form of whatever you do?
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: I think it gives me a kind of a familiarity for my audiences and also confidence because,
[Guest]: for example, if I mean, I've been an English journalist for my entire work life, but I
[Guest]: started Hindi storytelling, and then started Gaon Connection and it was all Hindi journalism.
[Guest]: So often when I tweet in English, some people say, sir, Hindi mein bol do, sir, Hindi mein
[Guest]: bhi toh kabhi bol diya karo, kuch troll type, toh phir mein boltao ki, toh main kahaniya
[Guest]: kya Farsi mein sunatao bhai.
[Guest]: So I think I have, that gives me that authority, I would say.
[Guest]: With the English speaking world, it gives me a slight subversiveness to tell them in
[Guest]: English that there are other realities, especially in the rural context.
[Guest]: So often the kind of stereotypes that the English media has and perpetuates about rural
[Guest]: India, I think I can, rather than looking in from the outside, I can tell them in the
[Guest]: language that they understand it.
[Guest]: And that gives me a slight subversiveness.
[Guest]: And yeah, so I think it helps.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things you've spoken about with regard to storytelling is you're seeing the
[Amit Varma]: world through the eyes of the others, so therefore, empathy goes up, it changes you as a person
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, which, and it seems to me that the conversations that you have,
[Amit Varma]: for example, whether in the slow interview, or all of the other, you know, the slow cafe,
[Amit Varma]: which you've done recently in the lockdown, seem to me to be also an extension of that.
[Amit Varma]: Because like what we see in modern conversations, which really irritates me, which I see in
[Amit Varma]: modern interviews, is that I don't see people listening.
[Amit Varma]: So the interviewer will be interrupting all the time, he'll be trying to show how smart
[Amit Varma]: he is.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and he'll be playing the gotcha game.
[Amit Varma]: And it says Stephen Covey once said that you're not listening to understand, you're listening
[Amit Varma]: to reply, which is almost a toxic habit.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do in all of your interviews so well, is that you just give the person
[Amit Varma]: all the space in the world, like one of the things that I love about your interviews,
[Amit Varma]: which it, you know, takes to an extent greater than with any other interviewer I've seen,
[Amit Varma]: is that you really allow for silence, that there will be these long stretches of silence.
[Amit Varma]: I remember your interview with Tigmanshu Dhulia, when you asked him about his friend Irfan
[Amit Varma]: Khan, who is so ill, and he's lost in thought.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't say a word, you just, you let the silence be there, you don't edit it out.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that, and you've done that in other conversations as well, that there are
[Amit Varma]: moments where, you know, you haven't felt that I have to force a conversation along
[Amit Varma]: the flow chalna chahiye, abhi main kya puchhu, oh, this is the next question on my list,
[Amit Varma]: yeh puchta ho.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you just, how did you arrive at that?
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: That's a very perceptive question.
[Guest]: So the slow interview was not planned as a show, like most things in my life.
[Guest]: When over the last many years, when I, taking a step back, I was living in Bombay, and I
[Guest]: started Gaon Connection in 2012.
[Guest]: And then I was coming here, once in a while, I used to come for 15 days, 20 days, literally
[Guest]: living out of a suitcase, and then going back.
[Guest]: And then one day, my wife asked me, where's home?
[Guest]: And it was a, again, a life changing question, because I couldn't give a clear answer if
[Guest]: it was Lucknow or Bombay.
[Guest]: And I said that, it does, she said, well, if you are so passionate about Gaon Connection,
[Guest]: then let's move here, which was unthinkable for me at the time, completely unthinkable,
[Guest]: because I was then working with the biggest of movie studios, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And I was fairly sorted.
[Guest]: So anyway, I started coming here and over the, of course, running Gaon Connection has
[Guest]: been an entire other battle itself, the biggest battle of my life.
[Guest]: But the school that my parents started, that got left behind in some way, in the battle
[Guest]: to run Gaon Connection.
[Guest]: And that used to give me guilt.
[Guest]: So when I went there, on one of the occasions, I said, let's build a room here, so that we
[Guest]: can come and at least stay here once in a while.
[Guest]: And if I'm here, then I look at the school also and its problems, and maybe I can help
[Guest]: address them in some way.
[Guest]: So my wife then built three rooms, and a little drawing room and all that.
[Guest]: And I had never thought I would spend any considerable time there.
[Guest]: But it came out quite well, and she said, she one day said that, I need a name for this,
[Guest]: because I want to put a sign outside.
[Guest]: So I didn't want to give a name like Land's End or so-and-so Kutir or so-and-so Villa
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: I didn't think much, I thought for just two minutes, I said, let's call it Slow.
[Guest]: And she immediately approved it, liked it.
[Guest]: I said, you know, it should be called what we feel here, the state of mind here.
[Guest]: We called it Slow.
[Guest]: And then I started going there, staying there.
[Guest]: So the mental block of being cut off from the city slowly evaporated, and I started
[Guest]: liking that.
[Guest]: And I used to post pictures on social media sometimes.
[Guest]: So my daughter, who I'm delighted that she has friends in the village also, friends from
[Guest]: rich families also, friends in my parents' middle class building also.
[Guest]: So some picture of hers I put with her friends in the village on the veranda, which is like
[Guest]: black and white, like a chessboard color.
[Guest]: So Pankaj Tripathi is someone I knew on social media, never met him.
[Guest]: So I was going to Bombay and I messaged him like, let's meet, finally.
[Guest]: He said, I'm in your city.
[Guest]: So I met him the next day and I said, let's go to the village.
[Guest]: So I drove and I had asked two camera persons to just sit behind us and shoot randomly.
[Guest]: And we were talking and normally and they were shooting and we were so unprepared that
[Guest]: we had one mic between the two of us.
[Guest]: So there was no show or anything like that planned.
[Guest]: When we reached and we spoke some more there, and then when Pankaj left, I said, it's good,
[Guest]: let's make something.
[Guest]: So it was something like that Monday-Monday moment when I said, this is going to be something
[Guest]: big, let's give it a name.
[Guest]: The same thing here.
[Guest]: I said, I think this is something good, let's give it a name.
[Guest]: Because it is done at slow, let's call it the slow interview.
[Guest]: And it also very well and very honestly defines that conversation that this is not an interview
[Guest]: which will be sensational or hurried or will have a, you know, what do they call it, rapid
[Guest]: fire or, you know, this is not that.
[Guest]: So very clearly for the audience, it defines it.
[Guest]: So we put it out.
[Guest]: And once again, I was at that juncture in my life when I was doing something I had never
[Guest]: done.
[Guest]: I didn't know how to do it.
[Guest]: I've never, I'm a newspaper person.
[Guest]: I had, while I'm not afraid of the camera, I've come in front of the camera for different
[Guest]: reasons, but I was not a visual person.
[Guest]: So now here I was kind of directing a show.
[Guest]: And so the camera team initially and very capable colleagues, they said, sir, we access
[Guest]: working, the camera should be lurking.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: Two people are talking and the camera can be anywhere it's lurking and we started working
[Guest]: on camera position.
[Guest]: It was exciting for me.
[Guest]: I was experiencing the same thrill again.
[Guest]: Like we used to do these, those little experiments with something that you have control over,
[Guest]: but no conventional knowledge of.
[Guest]: So there's no pressure.
[Guest]: Like when I was doing storytelling, if somebody else was doing it before me, I would have
[Guest]: that pressure.
[Guest]: I could be myself.
[Guest]: I always narrated stories as if I'm narrating to a person next to me on a park bench.
[Guest]: That was always my reference.
[Guest]: And here I was again, at this juncture of my creative career, where it was the same
[Guest]: excitement of starting something again.
[Guest]: And I told our team that this is not an interview.
[Guest]: This is a scene.
[Guest]: Imagine that this is a scene from a film.
[Guest]: How would the camera look at the subjects?
[Guest]: They would not look at like, you know, two people sitting left, right, and you're looking
[Guest]: at it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, so we evolved a new visual grammar.
[Guest]: We broke all templates of how interviews should be shot because I didn't know how they should
[Guest]: be shot.
[Guest]: My ignorance led to us creating a new form.
[Guest]: And suddenly these colleagues of ours who are from the biggest TV channels and they
[Guest]: left that world came here and they were, I think, somewhere conscious and unsure that
[Guest]: we are breaking all the rules.
[Guest]: What will the veterans think?
[Guest]: And suddenly they were getting messages like, oh my God, this, we've never seen anything
[Guest]: like this.
[Guest]: What are these camera angles?
[Guest]: Then a new video editor arrived.
[Guest]: And I remember he edited the Manoj Bajpai interview.
[Guest]: And I watched it and I said, my reaction was, where are the pauses?
[Guest]: Shit, sir, wo lambe lambe pauses the, bhai pauses hi toh show hai.
[Guest]: So I mean, that I'm quite happy you pointed out the pauses and the silences.
[Guest]: And that's what it, this is not a show that looks for headlines.
[Guest]: This is not a headline hunting show.
[Guest]: This is not a sensational show.
[Guest]: There have been at least two occasions when guests have called after the show ki yaar
[Guest]: main toh bhuli gaya tha ki camera chal raha hai, main itna engrossed tha, main yaar wo
[Guest]: cheez kai gaya tha, yaar hata doge kya wo aali cheez?
[Guest]: Haan hata dege.
[Guest]: Which any other TV channel person would jump because, you know, they were controversial
[Guest]: or too honest and hence, you know, controversial or whatever.
[Guest]: And I think it goes back to the humility of communicators.
[Guest]: It goes back to knowing and realizing that this show is not about me.
[Guest]: My playground is separate.
[Guest]: When I have the mic, when it's me talking and people are listening, that is a separate
[Guest]: playground.
[Guest]: This is not that.
[Guest]: This is, I am, and I often tell this to guests in these exact same words.
[Guest]: It's kind of a cliche, I tell them ki main ek postman hoon, ek librarian hoon main.
[Guest]: So I also don't want these conversations to be dated.
[Guest]: I never ask them, aapki agli film kaunsi aa rahi hai?
[Guest]: And I tell them in the beginning, I'm not interested.
[Guest]: This is not the show where you promote your next film.
[Guest]: You can do that in Slow Cafe, we've designed a new show, digital show you can talk about,
[Guest]: but not in the Slow interview.
[Guest]: And what happened was that initially, I mean, it's a bit like everything else I've done
[Guest]: in my life that we were, if we had told people that I'm starting a show, which will have
[Guest]: nothing controversial, nothing newsy, nothing about their filming gossip and will be this
[Guest]: long.
[Guest]: Somebody might have said the same sentence, which I've heard in many forms when I've started
[Guest]: something new, which is that this is a brilliant idea, it will never work.
[Guest]: So when I started it, I was slightly hesitant.
[Guest]: The first Pankaj Draupadi episode is only 30 minutes, which seemed very long to me,
[Guest]: because the conventional wisdom handed over by the pundits was that YouTube is about snackable
[Guest]: content, short form content, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But I realized that the people said, sir, where is the next part?
[Guest]: So we did another part of 30 minutes.
[Guest]: And it was the same people who watch Netflix and Amazon.
[Guest]: And they were loving these conversations, which had nothing titillating to offer.
[Guest]: They were exactly the kind of tonality that we are talking about right now.
[Guest]: And there were also internal academic sort of tussles within the team on the format of
[Guest]: the length.
[Guest]: If it became 45 minutes, initially, people would start getting antsy, so it's very long.
[Guest]: And I used to say, even if it's two hours, let the viewer decide, if they want to watch
[Guest]: 30 minutes, let them watch it.
[Guest]: And there might be 10 people out of 200 who might watch the whole two hours.
[Guest]: Why are you depriving them when you have that conversation?
[Guest]: So slowly, and when the numbers started coming in, when we had millions of people watching
[Guest]: them, we got the graceful and humble confidence that we have invented a new form, a new type.
[Guest]: And then suddenly we started getting requests from people to feature them or their artists
[Guest]: in these interviews.
[Guest]: I don't know if viewers notice or not, but I go in my interview with zero preparation.
[Guest]: I don't like talking to my guests before the shoot begins, because how I am off camera
[Guest]: is exactly as I am with them on camera.
[Guest]: There's no put on, there's nothing that's artificial.
[Guest]: The show doesn't even have a formal opening or ending, it just drifts off.
[Guest]: And I've seen that guests open up in the most remarkable of ways when they are on the show.
[Guest]: A lot of guests say that, I don't know, they find something...
[Guest]: Some of them I know, but some of them I don't know, I've met them for the first time.
[Guest]: But we're talking about some things that are often deeply personal.
[Guest]: And I don't want to prod, I don't want to talk to them about, okay, how was your relationship
[Guest]: with your wife?
[Guest]: But then if I feel that the conversation is going that way, if someone says that I didn't
[Guest]: get along with my father, I will say, in some ways it's just that one word question.
[Guest]: Also a lot of things that they are never asked, I've asked many guests, are you a good father?
[Guest]: And they reflect, are you a good son?
[Guest]: They break down on the show, it's been a great journey for me, great journey.
[Guest]: My fear is, it's like you go to some shows, you go prepared, you go to a comedy show,
[Guest]: you know there's going to be a certain kind of conversation.
[Guest]: So I don't want people to come prepared to my show, I don't want people to come ready
[Guest]: to tell a sob story.
[Guest]: And I need to work on myself as an interviewer there, to not sound too predictable.
[Guest]: It's the same as when I was there as a reporter.
[Guest]: So how should I, should I open, you know, what should my opening question be?
[Guest]: How should I take it forward?
[Guest]: Like with, there was one preparation which I did with Ayushman Khurrana, where one of
[Guest]: my colleagues, she went to his parents and he spoke about a punishment room.
[Guest]: And I opened by saying, what if I tell you, ki mujhe pata hai ki aapke ghar mein punishment
[Guest]: room hai.
[Guest]: And he, I mean, that look on his face was priceless.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, I just want this, and also we didn't tie it down to any periodicity.
[Guest]: That's very, very conscious as a decision.
[Guest]: Let people, people keep saying, sir, agla kab aa raha hai, agla kab aa raha hai.
[Guest]: So people also know that, that it has no fixed periodicity.
[Guest]: So and also what happened was that after the Pankaj Tripathi interview came and then Vishal
[Guest]: Bhardwaj and the initial few ones, we didn't define the show, the audience started to define
[Guest]: the show.
[Guest]: Like the audience started saying, sir, aisa lagta hai hum peeche ki seat pe baithe hain
[Guest]: aur do log baat kar rahe hain, hum sun rahe hain bas.
[Guest]: So that was, I mean, it's like the audiences had started to define our storytelling.
[Guest]: Ki sir, jab aapko sunte hain to lag, kuch seekhne ko milta hai, ek bhaitar insaan ban
[Guest]: jaate hain.
[Guest]: Aisi cheeze dekhte hain, lagta hai humare saamne ho raha hai.
[Guest]: So from there came the tagline of the radio show, Kahaniya jan mein aap milte hain khud
[Guest]: se.
[Guest]: It came because a lot of people said that, ki lagta hai humare saath ho raha hai, lagta
[Guest]: hai ye to meri kahani hai, you know.
[Guest]: So yeah, it's been a good journey.
[Guest]: This year we couldn't shoot anything because of COVID, but now we'll be starting some shoots.
[Guest]: We just shot one with Suresh Rehna, he was very keen and we were talking about him coming
[Guest]: down and so he drove down and also now a lot of guests, we request them to stay overnight
[Guest]: and they stay at my home.
[Guest]: So and that, the pace, the languid nature of, it just comes through and everything.
[Guest]: And people notice, like just yesterday somebody said ki, sir wo Tigmanshu Dhulia mein aap
[Guest]: jab breakfast ho raha hai, aapne unko kyu nahi pehle serve kiya?
[Guest]: And I realized that because I'm, I mean, I'm kind of a loner.
[Guest]: So the niceties or the decorum of hosting others, my wife also said it, I mean, after
[Guest]: watching the show, ki tumne unko kyu nahi pehle diya?
[Guest]: Ab nahi hai mujhe yeh tamiz, kyuki main khata hi nahi ho zyada logon ke saath, akela hi
[Guest]: rehta ho.
[Guest]: So the viewer said it, bola ki sir, in our parts yeh toh theek nahi hai sir, aapko pehle
[Guest]: unko serve karna chahiye tha.
[Guest]: But I love that, you know, the smallest of details they notice.
[Guest]: So it's been a, it started again as a beautiful coincidence, a new creative journey, but who
[Guest]: knew that sitting out of my village, I would be able to do these conversations, which will
[Guest]: be watched around the world.
[Guest]: And like when Nawazuddin Siddiqui came, he said, aap bahut ziddi hai, aur aap, yeh aapki
[Guest]: zid hai ki aap Bombay chhod ke aa gaye hain, ab aap keh rahe hain sab yahan pe aayiye, aur
[Guest]: main isi liye aaya hu yahan, aur sari duniya yahan pe aayegi.
[Guest]: So I mean, it's amazing, like Taapsee Pannu is sitting on a gaon ki puliya bahar pe baithi
[Guest]: hain, ya Suresh Raina jhule pe baithi hain, you know, so didn't realize that it would
[Guest]: sort of, you know, become.
[Guest]: And after that, I realized that a lot of other film related interviews, people are getting
[Guest]: the courage to do longer, like a lot of film interviews now are like one hour, which was
[Guest]: unthinkable earlier.
[Guest]: So, and they tell me also that many friends.
[Guest]: So I think maybe it's given encouragement to longer form conversations, because it's
[Guest]: got the numbers, because guests, you know, so it's good.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that's, that's very evocative with me, because that's a refrain that I have constantly
[Amit Varma]: also heard in my life that this is idea brilliant, it will not work, like, before I did my blog
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut, if I was to pitch it to somebody through a platform or whatever, they'd laugh
[Amit Varma]: me out of the room, right?
[Amit Varma]: If I'm going to do a three hour interview podcast, where I will take an obscure topic
[Amit Varma]: with a guest and talk about it and whatever, I would have laughed myself out of the room
[Amit Varma]: and just evolved this way and it happened to work.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess speculating one reason for that might be that while we contain multitudes
[Amit Varma]: and while we are a very large country, where even the smallest niche actually has good
[Amit Varma]: absolute numbers, you know, when people think of content, or when they look at it from a
[Amit Varma]: marketing perspective, then it becomes reductive, it becomes reductive to that most popular
[Amit Varma]: strand of a person's behavior, and not necessarily to, you know, the other aspects of that nature,
[Amit Varma]: though, you know, you know, if there is one complaint I have about the slow interview,
[Amit Varma]: quite honestly, it's that it's not long enough.
[Amit Varma]: I understand that I have the luxury of saying that from a perspective of audio, because
[Amit Varma]: people listen to audio in a different way, you're listening at double speed while you're
[Amit Varma]: commuting or working out.
[Amit Varma]: So you can feed that sort of hunger for depth a little more, you're not stuck in front of
[Amit Varma]: a laptop looking at a screen, the other, you know, the interesting thing also that I noticed
[Amit Varma]: about your show, which came out of a conversation I had with a recent guest, where she was sort
[Amit Varma]: of talking about how my approach towards the conversation I had with her was kind in her
[Amit Varma]: words and give her the space to sort of, you know, flesh out the thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: And my thinking was that no, she was the one who was kind because from the first moment
[Amit Varma]: of the interview, she trusted me completely.
[Amit Varma]: And I saw that in your interview, for example, with Piyush Mishra, where initially you ask
[Amit Varma]: him just one question, something like that.
[Amit Varma]: And he just goes on for 45 minutes on that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's that whole flow where you don't have to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And there is that element of trust and, you know, and it felt magical to me.
[Guest]: And is there in so many of your sort of interviews, where you find this?
[Guest]: In one interview, when we in the second part, where we sit on a puliya, he says,
[Guest]: Bahut parichit se lagte ho, because I've not met him, I had not met him before that.
[Guest]: And it seemed like we had met.
[Guest]: And he said ki bahut parichit se, so I said is that a good thing or a bad thing?
[Guest]: He said, No, it's a really good thing.
[Guest]: They trust me and like Anurag Kashyap had tweeted that ki kaise nikalwa lete ho tum.
[Guest]: But, you know, I think just being a good listener is a good starting point and being an earnest
[Guest]: and honest listener, who's not looking at your words as a commodity, who's not wanting
[Guest]: to make it a headline, who's not doing it for the traffic, who wants to just chronicle
[Guest]: this for some years in the future when you might or might not want to say these things
[Guest]: or all that.
[Guest]: So yes, I feel that that guests do have that, I mean, like with Sanjay Mishra, which is
[Guest]: like amazing, another kind of interview, such a and, and there's laughter, but there's some
[Guest]: tears also there and, but we had never met.
[Guest]: And when we spoke on the phone the day before the shoot, he said, main aa gaya hoon, I'm
[Guest]: dying to come.
[Guest]: Are bhai matlab, main toh itna wait kar raha hoon aane ka.
[Guest]: So there's that thing also too, it's not, it's not that, you know, these are guests
[Guest]: who would wait to be on camera or wait to be any show.
[Guest]: I think it's that moment because you never asked, you never have these conversations
[Guest]: in the world, they never have these conversations.
[Guest]: And just that island of calm or comfort that they do not have to be fake.
[Guest]: Like when we shot with Manoj Bajpayee and I had never met him.
[Guest]: And just before the shoot, I said that film hi show nahi.
[Guest]: So he had seen one or two episodes, I think he said, he said, I know Anurag for 27 years,
[Guest]: but even watching your show, I came to know a few things, which I had, I never knew.
[Guest]: And beech mein kya hoa ki, he said, chai pee le hain.
[Guest]: So he looked at the assistant, he said, arey yeh wala show hai jisme chai la sakte hain
[Guest]: beech mein, lao lao lao.
[Guest]: So they get it that it's not, you know, like a studio, there's that and the other.
[Guest]: And from the beginning, we've had that, that someone bringing tea, you know, all that,
[Guest]: the pause, it's just a slice of life.
[Amit Varma]: It's nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: And has it changed you to doing the show?
[Amit Varma]: Because I realized that a lot of the questions that you ask also seem to have a personal
[Amit Varma]: resonance.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you were chatting, I think, with Vishal Bhardwaj, and you asked him about fatherhood.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that, you know, jab beti paida hoti hai, toh baap bhi paida hoti hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and I remember the expression on your face as you're nodding at that point
[Amit Varma]: in time.
[Amit Varma]: And it's obviously resonant there.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of your questions also seem to be almost as if, you know, you're asking yourself
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, or you've thought about these things.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you're asking the viewer.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all, you know, so intimate, that whole setting.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: No, I think a lot of these questions, they sound very simple.
[Guest]: But they set you off on a mental path that you've not gone down before.
[Guest]: Just asking yourself, have you been a good son?
[Guest]: You know, it's a five word question that you've probably never asked yourself before.
[Guest]: Are you a good father?
[Guest]: So in asking them, I'm also asking the same things of myself.
[Guest]: I'm also reflecting.
[Guest]: And the searing honesty that my guests, you know, reply with, is something that I take
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: And for sure, I mean, it's very personal.
[Guest]: It's the idea of a lot of people speak about losing their loved ones or what happened.
[Guest]: And it makes me afraid too.
[Guest]: It makes the fear of losing our loved ones and so yeah, it resonates.
[Guest]: And the same thing happens with our viewers, because in a sense, I'm asking them those
[Guest]: questions and they're reflecting as well.
[Guest]: Because our guests are then coming out from their pedestal to show us their human side.
[Guest]: And most of them are very, very wonderful, very simple people, actually.
[Guest]: In real, they're very simple people.
[Guest]: And that's what comes through.
[Guest]: And because they're not putting on, it's not fake.
[Guest]: It comes through.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I'm not going to one by one ask you the questions that you ask your guests
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, fatherhood, and are you a good son?
[Amit Varma]: But I'll ask you a sort of a general question, which encompasses all of that, and which is
[Amit Varma]: something I think about as well, is that, you know, Kant, the philosopher, Immanuel
[Amit Varma]: Kant, not Amitabh Kant, Immanuel Kant used to speak about the categorical imperative
[Amit Varma]: that never treat other people as a means to an end, but as an end in themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And I think what we tend to do almost by default in our personal lives, is that we are the
[Amit Varma]: center of the universe and everything revolves around us.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we do treat other people as if they are the means to an end.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this self centeredness, which we need to fight.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes we can step out of our own minds and reflect and we can become aware of what
[Amit Varma]: we are doing.
[Amit Varma]: And in those moments, we can give other people the respect they deserve as autonomous people
[Amit Varma]: and actually care about them and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, the rest of the time, we are in this reflexive mode where we are the center
[Amit Varma]: of the universe, everything revolves around us, everyone has their roles, rather than,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we can't see them kind of beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've sort of taken that step out more than most people, whether it's through your
[Amit Varma]: storytelling by inhabiting the skins of others, or whether it's just asking this question
[Amit Varma]: of all of your guests.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've had a sort of chance to reflect upon all of this yourself.
[Amit Varma]: What is that sort of journey like?
[Amit Varma]: You know, in that sense, do you see yourself as having changed, let's say, even over the
[Amit Varma]: last 20 years, you know, is the Nilesh Mishra of 2020 very different from the Nilesh Mishra
[Amit Varma]: of say 1990 or even 2000?
[Guest]: Yes, one thing I've overcome very clearly is jealousy.
[Guest]: And as creative people, that is the one thing that, you know, we all contend with.
[Guest]: When you see someone else, write a great song or do a great story or win some journalism
[Guest]: award, and I used to be insanely jealous until a certain point.
[Guest]: And when you do that, this next emotion is that you question, you run them down.
[Guest]: But I remember that it's when I was working in the Hindustan Times, I kind of remember
[Guest]: that moment also.
[Guest]: It was an amazing moment and I was telling Swanan the other day in one episode of Slow
[Guest]: Cafe, where I was at the traffic light in front of the Hindustan Times building on Kasturba
[Guest]: Gandhi Marg, and Swanan's song, Bawaraman, had just become a big hit.
[Guest]: And I'm sure I felt jealous.
[Guest]: And you feel jealous because you ask yourself, why didn't you do this?
[Guest]: I could have done this.
[Guest]: Why didn't I do this?
[Guest]: Why didn't this thought strike me?
[Guest]: Why didn't this imagery, this use of words, which is so beautifully simple, why did it
[Guest]: strike me?
[Guest]: And I remember that it was as if it was a moment when everything melted in my mind.
[Guest]: And I picked up the phone and I called Swanan, I had his number, and I said, I'm just calling
[Guest]: just like that to say, how beautifully you've written.
[Guest]: I mean, it's an amazing piece of writing and I wish I had written it.
[Guest]: And that's the biggest compliment I can pay to you.
[Guest]: And I meant all of that.
[Guest]: And since then, when I went to Bombay, did an interview with him, and we were reminiscing
[Guest]: about all of that, I know how to openly praise him.
[Guest]: With my colleagues, with my peers, fellow writers, in Hindi we say, with an open mouth.
[Guest]: So I think that has most definitely changed.
[Guest]: And it happened somewhere toward the end of 2009, I think.
[Guest]: Since then, I've been able to win over jealousy.
[Guest]: Another thing is that I don't take fame seriously.
[Guest]: And I don't mean that as a cliche at all.
[Guest]: Fame doesn't attract me because the fame I have got is accidental.
[Guest]: I never expected it.
[Guest]: I was a reporter, I would have been writing stories because I love journalism, I would
[Guest]: have been a fairly good reporter.
[Guest]: But this happened and suddenly the written word was forgotten and the voice became my
[Guest]: identity.
[Guest]: So the idea of being famous, I mean, I enjoy that idea, I like that idea, but I would rather
[Guest]: be in a room, in the corner of a room in the shadows, watching people enjoy my work rather
[Guest]: than be in the center of it.
[Guest]: So being on camera or doing interviews or winning awards.
[Guest]: If I was to die tomorrow morning, I'm fairly content with what I've achieved in life.
[Guest]: And I would feel privileged that I've been able to do this much because, I mean, it's
[Guest]: been so many lives all rolled into one.
[Guest]: And to be able to do all of that, to be able to pursue something new, and then succeed
[Guest]: is a privilege, is a blessing.
[Guest]: So I feel that definitely is something I noticed about myself.
[Guest]: Over the last 20 years, I could never have imagined being an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: And that comes with its own mindset.
[Guest]: If you're an individual person, you hold on to honesty, values.
[Guest]: If you're an entrepreneur, often that might feel challenged.
[Guest]: So how do you remain honest there or retain the values there?
[Guest]: Mr. K.S.
[Guest]: Nair, who I mentioned earlier, who I count as one of my gurus, told me once that it's
[Guest]: not just necessary to be honest, but to seem honest to the world.
[Guest]: The worst situation, like my auditor told me last year, that, you know, you are honest,
[Guest]: but it would be a disaster if you seem dishonest after being so ruthlessly honest.
[Guest]: So there have been a lot of challenges there in running these startups and has come at
[Guest]: a big emotional cost.
[Guest]: How do I keep the artist in me alive?
[Guest]: Because that's been the big sacrifice I've had to pay.
[Guest]: And along with that, because until a point I was a lone wolf, I was the reporter who
[Guest]: was going out there doing whatever.
[Guest]: And suddenly now, when you're the boss, the worst boss is the one who competes with his
[Guest]: team or is jealous of his team or doesn't support his team member to do what he was
[Guest]: doing and to do better.
[Guest]: And I think I have, I mean, I love, for example, I love it when people in my team get credit,
[Guest]: awards.
[Guest]: I want to be in the background.
[Guest]: I want them to remember that I did something for them.
[Guest]: It's not entirely selfless that way.
[Guest]: I want them to definitely remember.
[Guest]: I want them to remember me well, even if they move on in their other career.
[Guest]: But I feel that that amount of selflessness is something I've been able to achieve in
[Guest]: my regular life.
[Guest]: And there's an honesty that I've been able to hold on.
[Guest]: See, my entire journey has been extremely unorthodox.
[Guest]: Even now when I'm on the fringes, I'm living in a village or a city far, far away from
[Guest]: where the action is, but I know that I'm relevant.
[Guest]: I know that whether it's storytelling, whether it's the slow interview, whether it's in whatever
[Guest]: new things we keep, that gives me confidence.
[Guest]: I know that, you know, the big media companies and I might not be working together because
[Guest]: I don't reach out to them.
[Guest]: But I know that tomorrow if I write a film script, I can reach out to five production
[Guest]: houses or directors.
[Guest]: So I think I'm living my life on my own terms, and I'm still relevant.
[Guest]: I'm in the mainstream.
[Guest]: I think, and I actually I rarely use the word I, because this is my personal journey, but
[Guest]: I think we have invented a new mainstream as we go along.
[Guest]: Whether it's Gaon Connection, whether it's whatever we're doing with Slow, it's subversive.
[Guest]: Like, end of this year, we are coming out with a small OTT platform, Slow will become
[Guest]: an OTT platform, Garib OTT, we don't have the funding to whatever, but whatever, because
[Guest]: we have a lot of content.
[Guest]: We are a magnet for talent, very, very accomplished people, talented people approach us.
[Guest]: So we want to give it a platform.
[Guest]: And our positioning is extremely clear, decency is our business model.
[Guest]: And if I look back at my entire journey, that's what it's been about.
[Guest]: The word Slow defined my entire life, my entire journey, my journalism, my radio, my storytelling
[Guest]: band, everything, what I've done in content and journalism.
[Guest]: And in all of that, I think that's one thing I've obstinately clung on to, that I will
[Guest]: not do anything for which I will repent or regret years later, sing my name against a
[Guest]: song that might have obscene lyrics or whatever, things like that.
[Guest]: So that between 2011-12 and now, being catapulted onto mass media, onto the center stage, so
[Guest]: to say, of the creative universe, and still get away on your own terms, not having to
[Guest]: conform, that has given me a lot of confidence.
[Guest]: And I intend to continue building on that, retaining that, not losing that flavor, not
[Guest]: losing the honesty that I really want to work with, and that integrity that I think not
[Guest]: just me, but all communicators must have.
[Guest]: But until a year and a half ago, so Gaon Connection was the centerpiece of my life.
[Guest]: And one day I reminded myself that I have no savings, and I'm a father of five, and
[Guest]: everything I earn, I use it to run Gaon Connection.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, let me do some things which are seen as quote unquote commercial, but
[Guest]: should have the same value system, which everything else I do or with has.
[Guest]: So if you're doing slow products, and if you're coming out with some 60 organic products,
[Guest]: they should have the same promise of honesty for the customer, for the consumer, and should
[Guest]: empower the farmer, just as Gaon Connection wants to.
[Guest]: So that also comes from a place of graceful confidence, I would say, very humble confidence,
[Guest]: but for sure confidence that we've carved out our own space, we've carved out a universe
[Guest]: of people, not just us who believe in this kind of content, and who are out there in
[Guest]: the millions.
[Guest]: Because if this world is run by numbers, reach, traffic, well, then let's speak your same
[Guest]: language.
[Guest]: I'm not going to say that I am doing parallel cinema that 100 people will watch, and you're
[Guest]: mainstream, and hence you're bad.
[Guest]: I will fight you on the same pitch.
[Guest]: I will fight mainstream with mainstream.
[Guest]: And I will show you that this stereotyping of audiences, the same person can watch an
[Guest]: action film, a horror film, a Govinda film, and enjoy Honey Singh, and listen to me.
[Guest]: It can be the same person, because that's how we are.
[Guest]: We like different things at different times, right?
[Guest]: But it's us who have bracketed people, stereotyped people, stereotyped audiences, and we are
[Guest]: proving that wrong with everything we do.
[Guest]: And we're doing things on our own terms, and that's what gives me confidence.
[Guest]: I have fears also.
[Guest]: My biggest fear is, what will happen when this country doesn't want to listen to stories
[Guest]: from me?
[Guest]: Every artist comes with a shelf life.
[Guest]: I think I'm privileged and blessed that I'm still being heard by people after eight, nine
[Guest]: years, a decade.
[Guest]: That's a lifetime for any artist.
[Guest]: Also, what will happen in the emerging world of artificial intelligence, where machines
[Guest]: will come on board?
[Guest]: But I do talk to scientists about it sometimes, and they say, well, they can never replace
[Guest]: storytelling.
[Guest]: They can never replace empathy or emotion.
[Guest]: So how do we do storytelling in the era of artificial intelligence is now the next frontier
[Amit Varma]: that I want to open up.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, if I can quickly sort of butt in there, I would say that one thing
[Amit Varma]: artificial intelligence cannot do is that when it speaks about a married woman's love
[Amit Varma]: for the music of her childhood, it cannot bring up that image of that harmonium being
[Amit Varma]: kept in the attic.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's something that requires storytellers to kind of grasp that little bit of magic.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I just want to say, I think your fear is completely unfounded.
[Amit Varma]: This is a one moment in the conversation where I'll disagree with you because good stories
[Amit Varma]: I think last forever.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I could speak to you for another three hours, quite frankly, you know, I can
[Amit Varma]: take it slower than you can even imagine.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, we've not done any justice to talking about Gao Connection, which can be
[Amit Varma]: an episode on its own and the slow movement and all of that, but you know, you've been
[Amit Varma]: so generous with your time and insights and I'll have to sort of let you go now.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much again for, you know, agreeing to come on the show and again being so trusting
[Amit Varma]: and open.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: It's been quite a delightful conversation.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to the show notes where I've
[Amit Varma]: put links to much of Nilesh's work.
[Amit Varma]: If you'd like to follow him on Twitter, you can do so at Nilesh Mishra, that's one word
[Amit Varma]: N-double-e-l-e-s-h-m-i-s-r-a.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-m-i-t-v-a-r-m-a.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.